## 4.13. Historical interlude: William Rowan Hamilton's quaternion of geometry, algebra, metaphysics, and poetry

At age 17, William Rowan Hamilton's interest in mathematics was sparked by his discovery of an error in Laplace's *Celestial Mechanics*. The Royal Astronomer of Ireland was so impressed that in a few years he secured for Hamilton the appointment as Royal Astronomer
at Dunsinsk Observatory, where Hamilton was stuck for the rest of his life. Hamilton ploughed through university studies by winning every conceivable honor and took his job at the Observatory even before graduation, but as a practical astronomer he proved to be a failure. Tedious observations did not appeal to him; he found theoretical subjects much more exciting.

Hamilton's social circle included major Romantic poets and philosophers. Hamilton himself harbored poetic aspirations, but William Wordsworth gently channeled his creative energies back to mathematics. Hamilton immersed himself in the reading of Kant, absorbed the Kantian notions of space and time as pure intuitions, and became intrigued by Kant's casual remark that just as geometry was the "science of space", algebra could be thought of as the "science of pure time" [**61**]. Later Hamilton insisted that Kant merely confirmed his own ideas and reading him was more "recognizing" than "discovering" [**17**, 2:96, 2:98].

Hamilton made his reputation as a mathematician by his studies in optics and mechanics, based on his notion of the characteristic function. He saw his greatest achievement in reducing the solution of $3n$ ordinary differential equations of the second order to the solution of two partial differential equations of the first order and second degree. It was not obvious that this represented any progress toward actually solving the problem, but Hamilton was convinced that even if "no practical facility is gained" from his method, the reduction of all complex calculations to the study of one characteristic function should give one "an intellectual pleasure" (quoted in [**18**, p. 89]).

Hamilton divided all algebraists into three schools of thought: the practical, the philological, and the theoretical. The practical school viewed algebra as an art and was interested in computation; the philological school viewed it as a language, a set of symbols to be manipulated according to some rules; and only the theoretical school, to which Hamilton modestly assigned himself, treated algebra as a science, "strict, pure, and independent, deduced by valid reasonings from its own intuitive principles" [**17**, 2:48].

"I am never satisfied unless I think that I can look beyond or through the signs to the things signified", wrote Hamilton. He was
frustrated by the inability to find "things signified" behind the notions of negative and imaginary numbers, which therefore looked absurd to him. By 1828 he became "greatly dissatisfied with the phrases, if not the reasonings, of even very eminent analysts". He believed that in order to "clear away the metaphysical stumbling-blocks that beset the entrance of analysis", one needed either to discard negative and imaginary numbers or to explain their "true sense" [**17**, 2:143, 1:304].

Hamilton soon learned of the so-called Argand diagram representing the complex number as a point on a plane, with its real and imaginary parts plotted on two rectangular axes. Inspired by this geometrical representation, he began looking for an algebraic representation of complex numbers for which all valid operations could be defined and soon developed the concept of algebraic couples. Echoing the Kantian vision of algebra as a science of time, Hamilton viewed these number couples as "steps" in time, rather than magnitudes, and he interpreted negative signs as reversals of temporality [**43**, p. 281]. He sought a new foundation of algebra in the intuitive notion of pure or mathematical time: the moment was to algebra what the point was to geometry, time intervals were finite straight lines, and an indefinite straight line represented Time itself. Being awfully busy prevented Hamilton from pursuing this promising line of reasoning further. As he remarked, "Time is needed, with all its gross reality of hours and days, even to write upon Pure Time" [**17**, 2:144].

The 2-dimensional representation of complex numbers also inspired Hamilton to seek hypercomplex numbers related to the "real" 3-dimensional space, or "triplets", as he called them. "Triplets" fit nicely with his philosophical interest in the idealistic triad "thesis-antithesis-synthesis" [**20**]. Adding triplets was easy, but they stubbornly refused to multiply. They did it for a good reason, for, as Frobenius would prove only after Hamilton's death, no such algebra was possible. In desperation, Hamilton tried ordered sets of four numbers, or "quaternions". They agreed to multiply only if the commutative law was lifted. This realization came to Hamilton on October 16th, 1843, as he was walking with his wife along the Royal Canal in Dublin. "I then and there felt the galvanic circuit of thought *close*; and the sparks which fell from it were the *fundamental equations*"
of quaternions, he later recalled. In a less poetic metaphor, he compared his satisfaction upon solving the problem to "an intellectual want relieved" [**17**, 2:435–436]. Hamilton immediately pulled out his notebook and jotted down the fundamental quaternion formula. Anxious to check the consistency of his new algebra, he continued scribbling in a carriage on the way to a meeting of the Council of the Royal Irish Academy and later while presiding over that meeting as Academy President. Neither chatting with his wife nor chairing an academic meeting apparently interfered with the train of his mathematical thought.

Hamilton felt that he might explore the ramifications of the quaternion theory for 10–15 years — as long as he had spent trying to work it out. He speculated that the scalar part of the quaternion might express quantity (say, of electricity), while the imaginary parts might determine direction and intensity, for example, electrical polarity. He even gave the calculus of quaternions a "semi-metaphysical" interpretation as a "calculus of polarities", echoing his earlier interest in idealist philosophy [**17**, 2:436, 2:440]. In an even stronger metaphysical vein, he came to view quaternions as a natural algebra of space and time, in which the three dimensions of space were joined by the fourth dimension of time. "The quaternion (was) born, as a curious offspring of a quaternion of parents, say of geometry, algebra, metaphysics, and poetry", he wrote and quoted his own sonnet addressed to Sir John Herschel as the clearest expression of the quaternion idea:

> "And how the one of Time, of Space the Three,
> Might in the Chain of Symbols girdled be"

(quoted in [**20**, p. 176]).

Hamilton did everything he could to make his theory unpalatable to the reader, choosing from the outset a "*metaphysical style of expression*". Herschel implored him to make his ideas "clear and familiar down to the level of ordinary unmetaphysical apprehension" and to "introduce the new phrases as strong meat gradually given to babes" [**17**, 2:633], but to no avail. Hamilton loaded his 800-page-long *Lectures on Quaternions* (1853) with new impenetrable terminology, such as *vector*, *vehend*, *vection*, *vectum*, *revector*, *revehend*, *revection*, *revectum*, *provector*, *transvector*, *factor*, *profactor*, *versor*, and
*quandrantal versor* [**10**, p. 36]. His attempt at a more basic introduction, *Elements of Quaternions*, ended up being even longer than the *Lectures*.

Quaternions were popularized by Hamilton's disciple Peter Tait, who fought a protracted battle with Josiah Willard Gibbs and Oliver Heaviside, promoters of the rival vector analysis. If quaternion multiplication lacked commutativity, the dot product and the cross product of vectors seemed to have even greater problems, and Tait branded vector analysis a "hermaphrodite monster" [**10**, p. 185].

Telling his great discovery story to his son 23 years after the fact, Hamilton added that at his *eureka* moment he could not "resist the impulse — unphilosophical as it may have been — to cut (the quaternion formula) with a knife on a stone" of a nearby bridge [**17**, 2:435]. Whether this was true or Hamilton simply could not resist the impulse to embellish his story, we will never know, as Time has long erased the etching off the bridge stone — but not off the annals of mathematics. Today the site of Hamilton's vandalism is marked by a plaque which reads, "Here as he walked by on the 16th of October 1843 Sir William Rowan Hamilton in a flash of genius discovered the fundamental formula for quaternion multiplication $i^2 = j^2 = k^2 = ijk = -1$ & cut it on a stone of this bridge". The bridge is now a pilgrimage site for mathematicians seeking to ignite their imagination off the sparks of the original flash.
