## 4.11. Historical interlude: Georg Frobenius's "Principle of Horse Trade"

Ferdinand Georg Frobenius (1849--1917) studied at the famous Berlin University under both Karl Weierstrass and Leopold Kronecker, two great mathematicians who later became bitter opponents. Weierstrass considered Frobenius one of his brightest doctoral students and greased the wheels of his career by securing him a full professorship at the Zurich Polytechnikum. In Zurich Frobenius quickly got married, but the joys of happy matrimony did not prevent him from continuing productive research. Frobenius earned a high reputation for his
studies of elliptic and theta functions, determinant and matrix theory, and bilinear forms. Some fifteen years later, Kronecker's passing opened a vacant slot in Berlin, and Weierstrass got posthumous revenge on his old opponent by hiring his own student, Frobenius, for Kronecker's chair. In 1892 Frobenius left for Berlin, just four years before Einstein enrolled as a student in the Zurich Polytechnikum.

Praised by his colleagues as "a first-rate stylist", who "writes clearly and understandably without ever attempting to delude the reader with empty phrases", Frobenius was soon elected to the prestigious Prussian Academy of Sciences [**11**, p. 38]. At this point, Frobenius began reevaluating his research interests. As he explained in his inaugural speech, the "labyrinth of formulas" in the theory of theta functions was having "a withering effect upon the mathematical imagination". He intended "to overcome this paralysis of the mathematical creative powers by time and again seeking renewal at the fountain of youth of arithmetic", i.e., number theory (quoted in [**24**, p. 220]). In his 40s, Frobenius indeed found this "fountain of youth" in "arithmetic", that is, in the theory of finite groups linked to the theory of numbers by Galois theory.

In 1896 Frobenius's comfortable life in Berlin was unceremoniously disrupted by several letters from Richard Dedekind, his old acquaintance and a predecessor at the Zurich Polytechnikum, now the dean of abstract algebra in Germany. After dealing with epistolary niceties and thanking Frobenius for brightening "the African darkness of the theory of groups", Dedekind shared some of his recent results on group theory, including his concept of the group determinant and the statement of his theorem about its factorization for abelian groups. Since Dedekind had not bothered to publish his work on the topic, Frobenius had never even heard of the group determinant, but he quickly grasped this concept and never let it go again. In his reply, Frobenius mildly chastised Dedekind for keeping back these "extremely beautiful results from your friends and admirers", and asked for more details. Dedekind then stumped his colleague with a "conjectured theorem" that the number of linear factors in
## 4.11. Historical interlude: Georg Frobenius

the group determinant is equal to the index of the commutator subgroup and admitted, "I distinctly feel that I will not achieve anything here" (quoted in [**24**, pp. 223, 224]).

Dedekind's challenge was perfectly timed for the spring break, and Frobenius, having some free time on his hands, immediately took the bait. Employing military metaphors to describe his own work, he waged a war against the group determinant. He invented generalized group characters and assaulted Dedekind's conjecture with their help. Frobenius's initial results seemed unsatisfactory, and he reported them to Dedekind with a disclaimer that "my conclusions are so complicated that I myself do not rightly know where the main point of the proof is, and in fact I am still slightly mistrustful of it" (quoted in [**24**, pp. 225, 230]).

A few days later a jubilant Frobenius wrote to Dedekind that he finally saw the way to a solution. Citing his former colleague Friedrich Schottky, Frobenius now looked at his own earlier frustration as the harbinger of a forthcoming breakthrough: "If in an investigation, after difficult mental exertion, the feeling arises that nothing will be achieved on the matter in question, then one can rejoice for he is standing before the solution" (quoted in [**24**, p. 230]). Within ten days, Frobenius proved all the main theorems of the theory of group determinants, except for one most important result.

The missing theorem stated, in modern language, that an irreducible representation occurs in the regular representation as often as its degree and was called by Frobenius "the Fundamental Theorem of the theory of group determinants". "It would be wonderful" if it were true, he wrote, "for then my theory would supply everything needful" for the determination of prime factors (quoted in [**24**, p. 235]). The proof took five months, during which Frobenius repeatedly used a new, effective technique, which he kept secret and shared privately only with Dedekind. The new method drew on the well-known bargaining strategy: "At the market, the desired horse is ignored as much as possible and at last is allowed to be formally recognized" (quoted in [**24**, p. 236]). In Frobenius's interpretation, in order to solve a mathematical problem, one had to preoccupy oneself with activities totally unrelated to mathematics. He applied this "Principle of the
Horse Trade" widely, taking his wife to trade exhibits and art shows, reading fiction, and clearing his garden of caterpillars. Frobenius implored Dedekind to keep this ingenious method a secret, promising to disclose it in a posthumous volume, *On the Methods of Mathematical Research*, with an appendix on caterpillar catching [**24**, p. 237]. Unfortunately, this volume never came out, which was a huge setback for the science of caterpillar-catching.

Miraculously, taking a break from research, combined with a healthy dose of working desk disorder, did help Frobenius refresh his thoughts and find a new approach. After returning home from vacation, Frobenius failed to find his earlier proof of one particular case of the missing theorem among his "highly scattered and disorganized papers". After "much torment", however, he discovered a new proof and recognized the crucial possibility of generalization [**24**, p. 237].

The same year Frobenius announced his results to the world in a series of papers. This was a wise move, since most of his correspondence with Dedekind eventually ended up in the hands of an American lawyer, who kept it in his drawer for thirty odd years and parted with it only after his retirement by giving it to a mathematics professor in exchange for \$25 [**27**].

Wielding the group determinant as his main weapon, within a few years Frobenius demolished a whole range of targets in representation theory. Although his proofs have now been supplanted by easier modern versions, his skills as a group determinant virtuoso remain unsurpassed, as the tool itself went out of use.

Frobenius labored mightily to keep things at the University of Berlin just the way they were in the glorious days of his student youth, and he accused the advocates of applied mathematics of trying to reduce this venerable institution to the rank of a technical school. His personality, which has been described as "occasionally choleric, quarrelsome, and given to invectives" [**21**], alienated him from many of his colleagues. Despite (or maybe partly due to?) Frobenius's uncompromising stance, the numbers of doctorates and teaching staff at the University gradually declined. Frobenius advised nineteen doctoral students, and only one of them wrote a dissertation on representation theory. Training that one student, however, proved fortuitous, for
that student was the brilliant mathematician Issai Schur, who kept the Frobenius tradition alive for decades to come.

In the meantime, Berlin was losing its reputation as the leading center of German mathematics to Göttingen. This did not endear Göttingen-style mathematics to Frobenius's heart, and he disaffectionately called it "a school, in which one amuses oneself more with rosy images than hard ideas" (quoted in [**11**, p. 47]). His aversion to the Göttingen patriarch Felix Klein and to Sophus Lie, according to one commentator, "knew no limits" (Biermann in [**11**, p. 47]).

Despite Frobenius's best efforts to keep the subject pure, representation theory has since been irretrievably polluted by applications in quantum physics and chemistry, crystallography, spectroscopy, and even virology. Worse still, thanks to the efforts of Hermann Weyl and Claude Chevalley, his beloved representation theory eventually merged with the theory of Lie groups. Frobenius thus was eventually reconciled with Lie, if only in the Platonic world of eternal mathematical objects.

