While at Cambridge, William Burnside (1852--1927) distinguished himself in rowing; his other achievements include emerging from the 1875 Mathematical Tripos as Second Wrangler and then beating First Wrangler in an even more grueling mathematical competition for the Smith Prize. Afterwards, he taught at Cambridge as a mathematics lecturer and a coach for both the Math Tripos and for the rowing
crews. In 1885, true to his aquatic interests, Burnside accepted the position of professor of mathematics in the Royal Naval College at Greenwich, where he taught until retirement. When his enthusiasm for rowing subsided, fishing became Burnside's favorite hobby. Even in mathematical research he stayed close to water, making major contributions to hydrodynamics.

On the strength of his contributions to mathematical physics and complex function theory, Burnside was elected to the Royal Society in 1893. Once this worthy goal was achieved, however, he abandoned such trifle subjects and dipped into the theory of groups. Four years later Burnside published the first English textbook on the subject, *Theory of Groups of Finite Order*. He was apparently delighted to take a break from applied studies and to immerse himself in an abstract theory, for he wrote in the preface: "The present treatise is intended to introduce to the reader the main outlines of the theory of groups of finite order apart from any applications". Burnside noted that group theory was not yet particularly popular in England. "It will afford me much satisfaction", he remarked, "if, by means of this book, I shall succeed in arousing interest among English mathematicians in a branch of pure mathematics which becomes the more fascinating the more it is studied" (quoted in [**11**, pp. 88-89]).

The interest of English mathematicians, however, proved not to be easily aroused, and ten years later Burnside bitterly remarked in his retiring Presidential address to the London Mathematical Society: "It is undoubtedly the fact that the theory of groups of finite order has failed, so far, to arouse the interest of any but a very small number of English mathematicians". Burnside cited the proliferation of courses on group theory in France, the United States, and especially Germany (attended by thirty students in Göttingen!), and he lamented the total indifference of British students toward the subject. His explanation was that group theory was treated in a highly abstract manner, "one which the young mind grasps with difficulty, if at all". As an example, Burnside cited a formal statement about the properties of the icosahedral group and claimed that "a proposal to verify the statement appears equivalent to proposing a series of conundrums. There would be nothing here to attract the student or
to suggest anything but the driest formalism utterly divorced from any of his previous mathematical studies" [**8**, pp. 1, 3, 5].

Burnside himself, however, had done much to establish the culture of purely abstract reasoning in group theory. In the preface to his 1897 book he wrote that his university teacher Arthur Cayley's "dictum that 'a group is defined by means of the laws of combination of its symbols' would imply that, in dealing with the theory of groups, no more concrete mode of representation should be used than is absolutely necessary" (quoted in [**11**, p. 90]). No wonder Burnside omitted any applications from his book, while his 1899 article on the simple group of order 504 mentioned a concrete example only in the last paragraph [**1**, p. 13]. He cultivated conciseness as a highest virtue. When a friend once asked for a more expanded treatment of certain topics from *Theory of Groups*, Burnside responded by "a declaration of regret that he had been unable to effect further condensation" [**15**, p. 70]. Burnside's ideal lived on in the tradition of Bourbaki, causing the wrath of the champions of "mathematics with a human face", led by Vladimir Arnold: "Algebraists usually define groups as sets with operations that satisfy a long list of hard-to-remember axioms. I think one cannot understand such a definition. I believe the algebraists set up such obstacles in the path of students to make it harder for the uninitiated to penetrate their field. Perhaps their goal, if only subconscious, is to boost the reputation of their field" [**2**, p. 118].

While pursuing the condensation ideal, Burnside decided to omit any discussion of linear substitution groups from the 1897 edition of *Theory of Groups*. "It would be difficult to find a result that could be most directly obtained by the consideration of groups of linear transformations", he wrote, justifying the exclusion of this useless subject (quoted in [**11**, p. 90]). Within a few months, however, Burnside had to reevaluate the wisdom of his decision, as he came across Frobenius's articles on group characters. Frobenius's results proved highly relevant to Burnside's own research on finite groups, and Burnside set out to reformulate them in his own language. Unlike Frobenius, Burnside felt at ease with Sophus Lie's apparatus of continuous groups of transformations, and he was able to derive all of Frobenius's main results on characters and on the group determinant by using the methods
of Lie groups and Lie algebras. Burnside published his research with a modest disclaimer that his paper was "not original, as the results arrived at are, with one or two slight exceptions, due to Herr Frobenius. The modes of proof, however, are in general quite distinct from those used by Herr Frobenius" (quoted in [**11**, p. 106]).

Herr Frobenius was hardly impressed by what he saw as a lame excuse for stepping on his toes. Richard Dedekind was similarly outraged, when he recognized in one of Burnside's papers his own theorem on the factorization of the group determinant of an abelian group. Frobenius consoled his friend by recounting his own losses: "This is the same Herr Burnside who annoyed me several years ago by quickly rediscovering all the theorems I had published on the theory of groups, in the same order and without exception: first my proof of Sylow's Theorems, then the theorem on groups with square-free orders, on groups of order $p^\alpha q$, on groups whose order is a product of four or five prime numbers, etc., etc. In any case, a very remarkable and amazing example of intellectual harmony, probably as is possible only in England and perhaps America" (quoted in [**24**, p. 242]). Burnside, for his part, began stressing that he had "obtained independently the chief results of Prof. Frobenius' earlier memoirs" (quoted in [**23**, p. 278]). Herren Burnside and Frobenius never corresponded to straighten things out, leaving the matter to historians, who somewhat qualified Burnside's claim of independence. Burnside was clearly inspired by Frobenius's work, although he did not know all of the relevant Frobenius papers, which left him enough space to explore on his own [**23**, p. 278].

Burnside and Frobenius worked neck and neck on the solvability of $p^\alpha q^\beta$ groups. While Sylow (1872), Frobenius (1895), and Jordan (1898) proved some special cases, Burnside succeeded in proving the general case in 1904. Burnside's character theoretic proof has been described as "so easy and pleasant" that later group-theoretic proofs would not even come close to its "compelling simplicity" and "striking beauty" [**30**, p. 469]. As Walter Feit suggested, "[T]he elegance of both the statement and the proof have attracted more people to the study of characters than any other result in the subject" [**14**, p. 4]. In particular, they attracted Feit, who in 1962 proved (with J.
G. Thompson) Burnside's conjecture that every group of odd order is solvable. Another seminal conjecture, Burnside's Problem, related to the structure of torsion groups, has preoccupied group theory and representation theory specialists for over a century, yielding the 1994 Fields Medal to Efim Zelmanov for the solution of its restricted version.

The appreciation of the beauty of Burnside's work took quite a while. His employment at the Royal Naval College separated him geographically from his university colleagues. He apparently had no "extensive direct contacts with other mathematicians interested in the subject (of group theory). It appears that he worked in isolation, possibly even more so than was normal for his times, with little opportunity (or, perhaps, inclination) to discuss his ideas with others", according to his biographer [**41**, p. 32]. Burnside taught several generations of navy officers but created no mathematical school of his own.

In December 1925 Burnside suffered a stroke, and his doctor forbade him, among other unhealthy activities, from doing mathematics. Burnside naturally disobeyed and did not live very long. His obituary in the London *Evening News* barely mentioned his mathematical studies but reported that "rowing men will regret to hear of the death of W. Burnside, one of the best known Cambridge athletes of his day" (quoted in [**11**, p. 96]).

Shortly before his death Burnside answered a query from a young mathematician named Philip Hall, who asked for advice on topics of group theory. Burnside sent him a postcard listing a few problems worth investigating. This message in a bottle, thrown into the sea, miraculously found a perfect addressee. The same volume of the *Journal of the London Mathematical Society* that contained Burnside's obituary featured Hall's "Note on Soluble Groups", which marked the beginning of his lifetime career in this field. Hall eventually succeeded Burnside as the chief promoter of group theory in England. "The aim of my researches", he later wrote, "has been to a very considerable extent that of extending and completing in certain directions the work of Burnside" (quoted in [**11**, p. 96]).
