Hermann Weyl (1885–1955) received his doctorate at the University of Göttingen under the guidance of David Hilbert, whom he later paid a rather dubious compliment by calling him "the Pied Piper . . . seducing so many rats to follow him into the deep river of mathematics". Hilbert called mathematical physics "a vital nerve" of mathematics, and Weyl inherited the interest in cross-fertilization of mathematics and physics from his teacher (quoted in [**53**, pp. 357, 358]). The willingness of Göttingen mathematicians to get their formulas dirty by engaging physical problems set them apart from the obsessive purism of the Berlin mathematical school.

In 1913 Weyl was offered a professorship at the ETH in Zürich, despite a somewhat lukewarm endorsement from Frobenius, who regarded the work of all candidates who came from the Göttingen school as "very general, very deep, so abysmally deep that a shortsighted person like me finds it difficult to recognize new ideas" (quoted in [**22**, p. 421]). Weyl accepted and found himself in the company of Albert Einstein, who was teaching at the ETH at the time. Yet it took a world war to make Weyl pay attention to what Einstein was doing. The German government initially judged Weyl unfit to fight in World War I, but as losses were mounting, it reevaluated the concept of physical fitness and dragged him onto the battlefield. Weyl's encounter with the German army brought little satisfaction to either side. In 1916, at the request of the Swiss government, Weyl was discharged and allowed to resume his work at the ETH. "My mathematical mind was as blank as any veteran's, and I did not know what to do", he later recalled. "I began to study algebraic surfaces; but before I had
gotten far, Einstein's memoir came into my hands and set me afire" (quoted in [**52**, p. 62]). The inflaming memoir was Einstein's account of general relativity.

In 1917 Weyl gave a lecture course on general relativity at the ETH and soon turned it into the widely read book *Space-Time-Matter*, which went through four different editions within five years and was admired by Einstein himself as a "symphonic masterpiece" (quoted in [**46**, p. 65]). Weyl, however, could hardly resist the impulse to improve on Einstein's belabored mathematics. He was convinced that Riemannian geometry, on which Einstein based his theory, was not a consistently infinitesimal geometry and set out to create a "purely infinitesimal geometry". When he explained to a student that in Riemannian geometry the direction of the transported vector depended on the path, the student innocently asked whether the vector length changed as well. "Of course I gave him the orthodox answer at that moment, but in my bosom gnawed the doubt", Weyl recalled (quoted in [**52**, p. 154]). The orthodox answer was *no*, but he was tempted to see what would happen if the length indeed depended on the path. Weyl questioned the assumption of a fixed distance scale, or "gauge", implicit in Riemannian geometry, and arrived at a more general geometry, in which the gauge factor varied from point to point in space-time, just as railway gauge varied from country to country in the early 20th century [**42**, p. 3].

Weyl aspired at a unified field theory, bringing together the gravitational and the electromagnetic fields. Einstein was delighted to count Weyl among the supporters of general relativity but was less than enthusiastic to see him compete in the construction of physical theories. Einstein praised Weyl's theory as a "stroke of genius of the highest order" and concluded that "except for the agreement with reality it is in any case a grandiose achievement of thought" (quoted in [**52**, pp. 163--164]). As a true mathematician, Weyl could hardly share Einstein's obsession with "reality". As he later argued, "[I]t becomes evident that now the words 'in reality' must be put between quotation marks; we have a symbolic construction, but nothing which we could seriously pretend to be the true real world" (quoted in [**42**, p. 15]). In his reply to Einstein, Weyl pointedly wrote: "It must be
emphasized that the geometry that has been developed here is, from the mathematical viewpoint, the true local geometry. It would be strange if, instead of this true (geometry), a partial and inconsistent local geometry with the electromagnetic field glued to it were realized in Nature". Weyl easily matched Einstein in the degree of his sarcasm: "If you are right with regard to the real world, then I regret having to point out a mathematical inconsistency to the dear Lord" (quoted in [**22**, p. 434]).

Recasting the tensor language of Einstein's general relativity in the mold of the Göttingen school, Weyl focused on the development of tensor algebra, particularly on tensors with specific symmetry properties relevant to physical applications. He aspired to obtain a mathematical overview of possible symmetry types and found an appropriate vantage point in Frobenius's theory of finite group representations. Gradually Weyl turned further away from relativity and towards purely mathematical questions of group theory, trying to develop a group-theoretical foundation of the tensor calculus. Drawing on the work of Élie Cartan and Issai Schur, Weyl delved into the representation theory of finite groups, which he called "one of the most wonderful theories to be found in mathematics". Weyl exchanged letters with Schur, who wrote that "it would be of considerable interest to me to see how my latest results on the number of variables and characters could be derived on the basis of Cartan's methods" (quoted in [**22**, pp. 456, 473]). Weyl obliged and quickly arranged the marriage of Élie Cartan's infinitesimal methods with Issai Schur's integral procedure. He did not limit himself, however, to rederiving Schur's results but went somewhat further and developed an entire theory of the representations of semisimple Lie groups, including explicit formulas for the irreducible characters and for the degrees of the corresponding representations.

The rise of quantum mechanics provided an occasion for Weyl to mount an attack on the hegemonic status of the mathematical continuum. He believed that different branches of mathematics might have different concepts of the number and supported the view that "each object which is offered to mathematical analysis carries its own kind of numbers to be defined in terms of that object and its intrinsic
constituents, instead of approaching every object by the same universal number system developed a priori and independently of the applications" (quoted in [**52**, p. 240]). In his 1928 book, *The Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics*, Weyl argued that the essence of symmetries central to quantum mechanics was to be found not in the continuum of real numbers but in the concepts of group theory, particularly in the "reciprocity" between the representations of symmetric permutation groups and complete linear groups [**60**, p. vii].

The physics community welcomed the help of a mathematician with cries of outrage and disgust. The American theoretical physicist John Slater christened the approach of Weyl and his followers "Gruppenpest", or "the pest of group theory". "The authors of the 'Gruppenpest' wrote papers which were incomprehensible to those like me who had not studied group theory", he later confessed. Their results appeared "negligible" to him, and he widely shared his "frustrating experience, worthy of the name of a pest", with other physicists, who were, as he claimed, "as disgusted as I had been with the group-theoretical approach to the problem" (quoted in [**55**, p. x]). As late as 1975, he still believed that he had "slain the 'Gruppenfest'", blissfully unaware of the essential and now routine applications of group theory in elementary particle physics.

More sympathetic physicists also had difficulty grappling with Weyl's mathematics, but this only heightened their admiration for him. Julian Schwinger had to admit that he had not "ever — not even to this day — fully mastered" Weyl's *Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics*. Yet he called Weyl "one of my gods", explaining that "the ways of gods are mysterious, inscrutable, and beyond the comprehension of ordinary mortals". When asked if he ever met a scholar he could not understand, Paul Dirac unhesitatingly replied, "Weyl". Yet he found Weyl's — purely mathematical — argument that electrons and antielectrons must have the same mass so disarmingly convincing that he reportedly derived from this encounter his famous maxim, "[I]t is more important to have beauty in one's equations than to have them fit experiment" (quoted in [**42**, p. 11, 19, 12]). Weyl expressed a similar sentiment with respect to mathematics: "My work has always tried to unite the true with the beautiful,
and when I had to choose one or the other, I usually chose the beautiful" (quoted in [**45**, p. 161]).

Weyl's return to Gottingen in 1930 to take up Hilbert's chair was badly timed to coincide with the Nazis' rise to power. One contemporary privately remarked, "Prof. Weyl is a peculiar race mixture, at least seven parts Holstein and one part Jewish blood with the particular vasomotor irritability that one encounters relatively often in people from Holstein and Friesland" (quoted in [**49**, p. 52]). Whatever vasomotor dysfunction may have resulted from the German components of his blood, it clearly paled in comparison with the trouble that his Jewish ancestry could cause him in Nazi Germany. Although Weyl's low Jewish blood count exempted him from the Nazis' direct attacks, his wife and children would have become targets of anti-Semitic measures. Having barely returned to his homeland, Weyl had to face the prospect of immigration again. The decision was difficult. At first he rejected an invitation to join the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study, unable to overcome "the love that binds me with every string of my heart to the German language" (quoted in [**52**, p. 271]). But when Hitler came to power, Weyl's head prevailed over his heart, and his family left for America.

Upon his arrival at Princeton, Weyl plunged into a mathematical culture quite inhospitable to the speculative philosophy so dear to him. Weyl perceived the "danger of a too thorough specialization and technicalization" of American mathematical research that produced "a mode of writing which must give the reader the impression of being shut up in a brightly illuminated cell where every detail sticks out with the same dazzling clarity, but without relief". Personally Weyl preferred "the open landscape under a clear sky with its depth of perspective, where the wealth of sharply defined nearby details gradually fades away toward the horizon" [**57**, p. viii].

In 1939, struggling with the "yoke of foreign language", imposed upon his writing, Weyl summed up his results on group invariants and representations in the book *The Classical Groups* [**57**, p. viii]. As Sir Michael Atiyah has noted, this volume "is not a linear book with a beginning, middle, and end. It is more like an elaborate painting that
has to be studied from different angles and in different lights. It is the despair of the student and the delight of the professor" [**3**, p. 328].

Weyl viewed his mathematical writings as works of art, as much as science. "My own mathematical works are always quite unsystematic, without mode or connection", he admitted. "Expression and shape are almost more to me than knowledge itself. But I believe that, leaving aside my own peculiar nature, there is in mathematics itself, in contrast to the experimental disciplines, a character which is nearer to that of free creative art" (quoted in [**3**, p. 323]). Weyl believed that "'mathematizing' may well be a creative activity of man, like language or music, of primary originality, whose historical decisions defy complete objective rationalization" [**58**, p. 550].

In the artistry of mathematical creativity, in the beauty of formulas, in the eternal truths of mathematics sought Weyl a refuge from the horrors of the world wars and from the destruction of European culture [**53**, p. 365]. Yet after Hiroshima he realized that even pretty formulas may have deadly uses. "To what extent shall and can the theorist take responsibility for the practical consequences of his discoveries?" he asked. "What a beautiful theoretical edifice is quantum physics — and what a terrible thing is the atomic bomb!". Weyl disagreed with G. H. Hardy's defense of pure mathematics as a useless and harmless pursuit of beauty. Weyl insisted that the very meaning and value of mathematics were questioned "by the deadly menace of its misuse" (quoted in [**49**, p. 67–68]). He saw in mathematics the same moral choices that one faced in real life. His earlier reflections on the "metaphysical implications" of knowledge now acquired a broader meaning. "Mathematics is not the rigid and uninspiring schematism which the layman is so apt to see in it", he had written. "On the contrary, we stand in mathematics precisely at that point of intersection of limitation and freedom which is the essence of man himself" [**59**, p. 68].
