Saunders Mac Lane's (1909–2005) father and grandfather were both Congregational ministers, so young Saunders seemed destined for an ecclesiastical career. Early on, however, he started having "various theological doubts and questions". "[A] ministerial career would have required my belief of things of which I was uncertain", Mac Lane later recalled. "Mathematics, however, provided a different sort of certainty". One thing he was certain about was that the minister's income was woefully inadequate to provide for comfortable retirement. As a result, Mac Lane decided to pursue a career that would be "scientific rather than ministerial" [**33**, pp. 349–350]. He earned his bachelor's degree at Yale and his master's at Chicago.

Inspired by the "elegance of German abstract algebra", in which the notions of rings and fields axiomatized addition and multiplication, Mac Lane devoted his master's thesis to a similar axiomatization of exponentials, as well as plus and times. At Chicago, Mac Lane was put off by inadequate teaching and by examples of what he saw as a "display of pedantry", and he concluded that the mathematics department there "had ceased to be really first class" [**36**, p. 152]. He recalled that he had been taught that a vector was an $n$-tuple, "an idea that I soon had to unlearn" [**33**, p. 39]. Mac Lane wanted to write a doctoral dissertation on logic but could not find an advisor and decided to leave for Göttingen, the preeminent center of mathematical logic research.

At Göttingen, the home of the famous Hilbert school, Mac Lane learned group representations from Hermann Weyl and linear associative algebras from Emmy Noether. "To live in Göttingen was to be immersed in mathematical culture", Mac Lane wrote, recalling Göttingen as "an amalgam of research, teaching, and inspiration". Despite this immersion, Mac Lane could hardly ignore the tense political climate, the vociferous clashes among 27 political parties, and the students dressed in the Nazi brownshirt uniform. Mac Lane did write a thesis on logic but managed to overlook Gödel's famous incompleteness theorem, which appeared at that time. His thesis elicited
common schemes of proof in Russell and Whitehead's *Principia Mathematica* with the aim of abbreviating and perhaps mechanizing new proofs. The thesis was "naïve in supposing that all mathematics would be *actually* written in Whitehead and Russell style", Mac Lane admitted. Mac Lane was in Göttingen in 1933, when Hitler came to power, and he witnessed the ruthless destruction of the Hilbert school, as many leading Jewish mathematicians, including Courant and Noether, were dismissed from their jobs. The once famous mathematics department became "but a skeleton". Mac Lane rushed up to finish his thesis. Unimpressive by Göttingen standards, the thesis was accepted with the grade *Genügend*, the lowest grade. Mac Lane became the last American to earn a doctorate in the famous Hilbert school. One more thing Mac Lane managed to do before departure was to get married to Dorothy Jones. Being at Göttingen as he was, Mac Lane went to hear a mathematical lecture right after his wedding ceremony [**33**, pp. 48, 54, 51–52, 58, 52, 56].

In the 1930s mathematical logic was looked down upon by most mathematicians, who considered it part of philosophy rather than of mathematics proper. When he started teaching as an instructor at Harvard, Mac Lane intended to offer a logic course, but departmental needs forced him to lecture on algebra. Eventually he realized that it was easier to get a job as an algebraist than as a logician. In 1941, Mac Lane and Garrett Birkhoff co-authored *Survey of Modern Algebra*, the first American undergraduate textbook that espoused the abstract approach of Emmy Noether and B. L. van der Waerden. Initially judged as a text that "won't fly beyond the Hudson", the book eventually became a standard textbook for undergraduate algebra courses [**33**, pp. 62, 68, 82].

In the spring of 1941, Mac Lane received a semester leave from Harvard and applied to visit the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton. His application was turned down, and Mac Lane ended up going to the University of Michigan to give a series of six lectures. One of the Michigan mathematicians in the audience was Samuel ("Sammy") Eilenberg (1913–1988). He sat through the first five lectures but had to miss the last one, and he asked Mac Lane to give him the gist of it privately. Mac Lane did, and Eilenberg noticed a
similarity between Mac Lane's results on group extensions and his colleague Norman Steenrod's homology theory of solenoid-type spaces. "It was startling" to find that connection, Mac Lane later recalled. They stayed up all night and by morning they found not only "a new intrusion of algebra into topology" but also formed a lifelong collaborative duet, which eventually churned out 15 joint papers. Mac Lane later remarked that the rejection of his application to Princeton was fortuitous, for "had it been accepted, I might have missed working with Sammy" [**33**, pp. 101–104].

A Polish Jew, Eilenberg left Poland shortly before the start of World War II, following the truly wise advice of his father, once the best student in his town's yeshiva. Among other European refugee mathematicians, Eilenberg was welcomed by Oswald Veblen and Solomon Lefschetz of Princeton University, who helped him find a position at Michigan. For Eilenberg, mathematics was a social activity. "Though his mathematical ideas may seem to have a kind of crystalline austerity, Sammy was a warm, robust, and very animated human being", whose charm and humor were "hard to resist", recalled his former colleague [**6**, pp. 1351–1352]. Described as "energetic . . . , expressive, charismatic, quick witted, often confrontational, and a brilliant thinker and good-humored conversationalist", Eilenberg easily established contacts [**7**, p. 360]. His entire career was punctuated by various productive collaborations. Together with Steenrod, he "drained the Pontine Marshes of homology theory, turning an ugly morass of variously motivated constructions into a simple and elegant system of axioms applied, for the first time, to functors". In collaboration with Henri Cartan, Eilenberg systematized homology theories in their *Homological Algebra* (1956). This field developed so rapidly that within a few years Alexander Grothendieck reportedly branded this foundational text "le diplodocus", relegating it to the subject of paleontology [**6**, p. 1348].

Eilenberg believed that "the highest value in mathematics was to be found, not in specious depth nor in the overcoming of overwhelming difficulty, but rather in providing the definitive clarity that would illuminate its underlying order". He insisted on "lucidity, order, and understanding as opposed to trophy hunting". Eilenberg was called
the "greatest mathematical stylist", perhaps to the point of championing a "triumph of style over substance" [**6**, pp. 1349, 1348, 1344, 1350].

Eilenberg's style called for a minimalist approach, which his colleague described as "always to find the absolutely essential ingredients in any problem and work only with those ingredients and nothing else — in other words, get rid of all the superfluous information". Once asked if he could eat Chinese food with three chopsticks, he immediately answered in the affirmative and explained, "I'll take the three chopsticks, I'll put one of them aside on the table, and I'll use the other two" [**7**, p. 361].

Eilenberg and Mac Lane pushed the homological envelope into more complicated spaces in their joint 1942 paper "Natural Isomorphisms in Group Theory", which introduced the notion of a functor. André Weil, who reviewed their article in *Mathematical Reviews*, did not merely summarize it but added a remarkable note of praise. He wrote that the authors succeeded in finding "a precise definition" for the "vague idea of covariance and contravariance", "which is likely to be helpful in classifying and systematizing known results and also in looking for new relations between groups" (Weil in [**4**, p. 743]).

In the war years both Mac Lane and Eilenberg came to New York to work for the Applied Mathematics Group at Columbia University under the National Defense Research Council. They toiled on problems of airborne fire control during the day and on pure mathematics at night. While dealing with the concrete problem of computing the cohomology of the solenoid, they arrived at their universal coefficient theorem and the very general and abstract notions of category and functor. "These notions were so general", Mac Lane recalled, "that they hardly seemed to be real mathematics — would our mathematical colleagues accept them?" Mac Lane and Eilenberg hid their anxiety behind the jocular label "general abstract nonsense", by which they occasionally referred to their subject. "We didn't really mean the nonsense part, and we were proud of its generality", admitted Mac Lane [**33**, pp. 125–126].

In 1945 Eilenberg and Mac Lane summed up their findings in the article "General Theory of Natural Equivalences", which for the
first time defined categories. The article was reportedly "rejected by the editor of an inauspicious journal as 'more devoid of content than any I have read,' to which Mac Lane is said to have replied, 'That's the point' " [**7**, p. 362]. Eventually they managed to publish it in the *Transactions of the American Mathematical Society*. This involved a fair amount of wheeling and dealing. "Eilenberg, who knew the editor well, persuaded him to choose as referee a young mathematician", Mac Lane recalled, "one whom we could influence because he was then a junior member of the Applied Mathematics Group at Columbia University (war research), where Eilenberg and I were then also members, and I was Director" [**37**, p. 5983]. The article openly declared Eilenberg and Mac Lane's ambitious goals. "In a metamathematical sense our theory provides general concepts applicable to all branches of mathematics", they wrote, "and so contributes to the current trend towards uniform treatment of different mathematical disciplines" [**12**, p. 236].

The wide recognition of the power of Eilenberg and Mac Lane's ideas was a bit slow to come. Years passed before the words *category* and *functor* "could be pronounced unapologetically in diverse mathematical company" (Freyd in [**6**, p. 1351]). Luckily, the Air Force Office of Scientific Research became an important sponsor of research and conferences on category theory — an unexpected benefit of Mac Lane and Eilenberg's wartime work. Only by the mid-1960s did the Air Force eventually figure out that category theory was too abstract to bring any tangible improvements to air combat and discontinued its support [**33**, p. 239].

Category theory itself underwent quite a transformation after the initial insight. As Mac Lane recalled, when the 1945 paper came out, Eilenberg declared that "this would be the only paper necessary on the subject. It turned out that he was wrong" [**33**, p. 209]. Eilenberg and Mac Lane originally thought that the very concept of a category was "essentially an auxiliary one; our basic concepts are essentially those of a functor and of a natural transformation". They even suggested dropping the category concept altogether and adopting "an even more intuitive standpoint", according to which a functor "is not defined over the category of 'all' groups, but for each particular pair
of groups which may be given" [**12**, p. 247]. Moreover, although Mac Lane and Eilenberg believed that category theory "offered a conceptual view of parts of mathematics", they regarded it merely as "a handy language", "a language of orientation", not as a "field for further research effort" [**35**, pp. 334–335].

Although Eilenberg and Mac Lane invented category theory, for them "it was always an applied subject, not an end in itself. Categories were defined in order to define functors, which in turn were defined in order to define natural transformations, which were defined finally in order to prove theorems that could not be proved before". They viewed categories as instruments of mainstream mathematics. The idea that categories could be used "to state theorems that could not be stated before, that they were not tools but objects of nature worthy of study in their own right", sounded alien to them, for it seemed to place category theory on the fringe, outside the mainstream (Freyd in [**6**, p. 1351]). In the hands of Alexander Grothendieck, Daniel Kan, and Eilenberg's students, however, category theory became a dynamic field in its own right, profoundly transformed algebraic geometry, topology, and representation theory, and resonated across a wide range of disciplines, from mathematical logic and theoretical computer science to linguistics and philosophy. In the work of William Lawvere, category theory came to be regarded as a foundation for all of mathematics (Heller in [**6**, p. 1349]; [**7**, p. 362]).

Category theory caused a controversy within the group of French mathematicians who worked under the pseudonym Nicolas Bourbaki with the aim of producing a multivolume rigorous treatment of all contemporary mathematics from a unified conceptual point of view. On Weil's invitation, Eilenberg joined the group in 1950 and remained an active member for 15 years. "He knew admirably how to present his point of view, and he often made us agree to it", recalled Henri Cartan, another Bourbaki member (Cartan in [**6**, p. 1345]). Mac Lane was invited to attend a private Bourbaki meeting in 1954, perhaps with the idea that he would persuade the group to adopt the category-theoretical approach. Cartier, Chevalley, Eilenberg, and Grothendieck supported Mac Lane, but André Weil took
a cautious approach, which outweighed them [**39**, p. 5]. While genuinely interested in incorporating category theory, Bourbaki found it very difficult to abandon its prewar foundational concept of *structure*. Switching to categories would mean revising the whole body of previous work, while combining the two approaches seemed to undermine the Bourbakist ideal of unity of mathematics [**5**, p. 236]. "My facility in the French language was not sufficient to categorize Bourbaki", remarked Mac Lane. As a result, important parts of recent mathematical research fell out of Bourbaki's purview, perhaps contributing to the decline of their overall project. Mac Lane barely hid his disappointment in the outcome, calling the Bourbaki oeuvre a "magnificent multi-volume monster" and Bourbaki's definition of *structure* "a cumbersome piece of pedantry", which even Bourbaki never used (quoted in [**39**, p. 6]).

Ironically, the Bourbakist vision of unified mathematics found a powerful vehicle in category theory. General category-theoretical concepts have enjoyed wide use across many different mathematical fields; in fact, the very rigid division of mathematics into fields has been called into question. "Mathematics as it is today . . . can no longer be presented by piecemeal courses", argued Mac Lane in a 1954 talk, "for it is simply no longer true that advanced mathematics can be split neatly into compartments labelled 'algebra', 'analysis', 'geometry', and 'applied mathematics' ". He championed the "infusion of a geometrical point of view" and reminded his audience that "a vector is geometrical". "A vector is not an $n$-tuple of numbers until a coordinate system has been chosen. Any teacher and any text book which starts with the idea that vectors are $n$-tuples is committing a crime for which the proper punishment is ridicule" (quoted in [**40**, p. 245]).

Mac Lane's favorite pastime was sailing, which he considered "a much more serious sport" than skiing, which he had learned at Göttingen. On some sailing expeditions he spent time with prominent philosophers but showed little interest in their subject. "Thankfully, we paid more attention to sailing than to philosophical doctrine", he recalled. He found that most studies in philosophy of mathematics "paid little attention to the actual substance of mathematics beyond
the most elementary concerns" and set out to repair the situation. In his 1986 book *Mathematics, Form and Function*, Mac Lane quickly dispatched with an array of mathematical philosophies, from set theory ("often artificial") to formalism ("can't explain *which* of many formulas matter") to intuitionism ("can be dogmatic") to empiricism ("mathematics originates not just in facts") to Platonism ("a useful mythology and a speculative ontology"). He even dismissed the Romantic ideal of mathematics as "a search for austere forms of beauty" and offered instead "formal functionalism" — his vision of mathematics as "an extensive network of formal rules, definitions and systems, tightly tied here and there to activities and to science". Since mathematical entities do not necessarily correspond to any physical objects, Mac Lane argued, it would be meaningless to ask if mathematics is true. The "appropriate" questions about a particular piece of mathematics are different: is it correct (i.e., proved), responsive to some problem, illuminating, promising, relevant? According to Mac Lane, mathematics is *correct* but not *true* [**33**, pp. 143, 145, 455–456, 440, 441, 443].

Like Mac Lane, Eilenberg "had no patience for metaphysical argument" (Heller in [**6**, p. 1349]). He had his own passion outside mathematics, however. "A sophisticated and wise man who took a refined pleasure in life" (Bass in [**6**, p. 1352]), Eilenberg, in fact, had a parallel life. Known as "Sammy" to mathematicians, Eilenberg was equally famous as an art dealer and collector under the nickname "Professor" in the art world. Over the years, he amassed one of the most significant collections of Southeast Asian sculpture in the world and became a leading expert in the field. His biographer surmised that Eilenberg "found in ancient Hindu sculpture a formal elegance and imagination that resonated well with the same aesthetic sensibility — 'classical rather than romantic,' in the words of Alex Heller — that animated his mathematical work" [**7**, p. 362]. Eilenberg's two lives rarely intersected. His colleagues recalled only one occasion on which he "moved from a conversation about sculpture to one about mathematics. Sculptors, he said, learn early to create from the inside out: what finally is to be seen on the surface is the result of a lot of work in conceptualizing the interior. But there are others for whom the interior is the result of a lot of work on getting the surface
right. 'And,' Sammy asked, 'isn't that the case for my mathematics?' " (Freyd in [**6**, p. 1350]).

Mac Lane called his collaboration with Eilenberg "one small, but typical, example of East meets West. The great influx of refugee mathematicians from Europe presented a decisive stimulus for American mathematics in the 1940s" [**33**, p. 347]. The Eilenberg-Mac Lane collaboration not only brought together algebra and topology; it epitomized the cross-fertilization of different mathematical schools and the breaking down of internal disciplinary barriers within mathematics in the second half of the twentieth century.
