## 5.5. Historical interlude: William Burnside

of Lie groups and Lie algebras. Burnside published his research with a modest disclaimer that his paper was "not original, as the results arrived at are, with one or two slight exceptions, due to Herr Frobenius. The modes of proof, however, are in general quite distinct from those used by Herr Frobenius" (quoted in [**11**, p. 106]).

Herr Frobenius was hardly impressed by what he saw as a lame excuse for stepping on his toes. Richard Dedekind was similarly outraged, when he recognized in one of Burnside's papers his own theorem on the factorization of the group determinant of an abelian group. Frobenius consoled his friend by recounting his own losses: "This is the same Herr Burnside who annoyed me several years ago by quickly rediscovering all the theorems I had published on the theory of groups, in the same order and without exception: first my proof of Sylow's Theorems, then the theorem on groups with square-free orders, on groups of order $p^\alpha q$, on groups whose order is a product of four or five prime numbers, etc., etc. In any case, a very remarkable and amazing example of intellectual harmony, probably as is possible only in England and perhaps America" (quoted in [**24**, p. 242]). Burnside, for his part, began stressing that he had "obtained independently the chief results of Prof. Frobenius' earlier memoirs" (quoted in [**23**, p. 278]). Herren Burnside and Frobenius never corresponded to straighten things out, leaving the matter to historians, who somewhat qualified Burnside's claim of independence. Burnside was clearly inspired by Frobenius's work, although he did not know all of the relevant Frobenius papers, which left him enough space to explore on his own [**23**, p. 278].

Burnside and Frobenius worked neck and neck on the solvability of $p^\alpha q^\beta$ groups. While Sylow (1872), Frobenius (1895), and Jordan (1898) proved some special cases, Burnside succeeded in proving the general case in 1904. Burnside's character theoretic proof has been described as "so easy and pleasant" that later group-theoretic proofs would not even come close to its "compelling simplicity" and "striking beauty" [**30**, p. 469]. As Walter Feit suggested, "[T]he elegance of both the statement and the proof have attracted more people to the study of characters than any other result in the subject" [**14**, p. 4]. In particular, they attracted Feit, who in 1962 proved (with J.
