Any two elements in the first row of $T$ must be in different columns of $T'$, so there exists $q'_1 \in Q'_\lambda$ which moves all these elements to the first row. So there is $p_1 \in P_\lambda$ such that $p_1 T$ and $q'_1 T'$ have the same first row. Now do the same procedure with the second row, finding elements $p_2, q'_2$ such that $p_2 p_1 T$ and $q'_2 q'_1 T'$ have the same first two rows. Continuing so, we will construct the desired elements $p, q'$. The lemma is proved. $\square$

Let us introduce the **lexicographic ordering** on partitions: $\lambda > \mu$ if the first nonvanishing $\lambda_i - \mu_i$ is positive.

**Lemma 5.13.2.** *If $\lambda > \mu$, then $a_\lambda \mathbb{C}[S_n] b_\mu = 0$.*

**Proof.** Similarly to the previous lemma, it suffices to show that for any $g \in S_n$ there exists a transposition $t \in P_\lambda$ such that $g^{-1}tg \in Q_\mu$. Let $T = T_\lambda$ and $T' = gT_\mu$. We claim that there are two integers which are in the same row of $T$ and the same column of $T'$. Indeed, if $\lambda_1 > \mu_1$, this is clear by the pigeonhole principle (already for the first row). Otherwise, if $\lambda_1 = \mu_1$, as in the proof of the previous lemma, we can find elements $p_1 \in P_\lambda$, $q'_1 \in gQ_\mu g^{-1}$ such that $p_1 T$ and $q'_1 T'$ have the same first row and repeat the argument for the second row, and so on. Eventually, having done $i-1$ such steps, we'll have $\lambda_i > \mu_i$, which means that some two elements of the $i$th row of the first tableau are in the same column of the second tableau, completing the proof. $\square$

**Lemma 5.13.3.** $c_\lambda$ *is proportional to an idempotent. Namely,* $c_\lambda^2 = \frac{n!}{|P_\lambda||Q_\lambda| \dim V_\lambda} c_\lambda$.

**Proof.** Lemma 5.13.1 implies that $c_\lambda^2$ is proportional to $c_\lambda$. Also, it is easy to see that the trace of $c_\lambda$ in the regular representation is $n! |P_\lambda|^{-1} |Q_\lambda|^{-1}$ (as the coefficient of the identity element in $c_\lambda$ is $|P_\lambda|^{-1} |Q_\lambda|^{-1}$). This implies the statement. $\square$

**Lemma 5.13.4.** *Let $A$ be an algebra and let $e$ be an idempotent in $A$. Then for any left $A$-module $M$, one has $\operatorname{Hom}_A(Ae, M) \cong eM$ (namely, $x \in eM$ corresponds to $f_x : Ae \to M$ given by $f_x(a) = ax$, $a \in Ae$).*
