emphasized that the geometry that has been developed here is, from the mathematical viewpoint, the true local geometry. It would be strange if, instead of this true (geometry), a partial and inconsistent local geometry with the electromagnetic field glued to it were realized in Nature". Weyl easily matched Einstein in the degree of his sarcasm: "If you are right with regard to the real world, then I regret having to point out a mathematical inconsistency to the dear Lord" (quoted in [**22**, p. 434]).

Recasting the tensor language of Einstein's general relativity in the mold of the Göttingen school, Weyl focused on the development of tensor algebra, particularly on tensors with specific symmetry properties relevant to physical applications. He aspired to obtain a mathematical overview of possible symmetry types and found an appropriate vantage point in Frobenius's theory of finite group representations. Gradually Weyl turned further away from relativity and towards purely mathematical questions of group theory, trying to develop a group-theoretical foundation of the tensor calculus. Drawing on the work of Élie Cartan and Issai Schur, Weyl delved into the representation theory of finite groups, which he called "one of the most wonderful theories to be found in mathematics". Weyl exchanged letters with Schur, who wrote that "it would be of considerable interest to me to see how my latest results on the number of variables and characters could be derived on the basis of Cartan's methods" (quoted in [**22**, pp. 456, 473]). Weyl obliged and quickly arranged the marriage of Élie Cartan's infinitesimal methods with Issai Schur's integral procedure. He did not limit himself, however, to rederiving Schur's results but went somewhat further and developed an entire theory of the representations of semisimple Lie groups, including explicit formulas for the irreducible characters and for the degrees of the corresponding representations.

The rise of quantum mechanics provided an occasion for Weyl to mount an attack on the hegemonic status of the mathematical continuum. He believed that different branches of mathematics might have different concepts of the number and supported the view that "each object which is offered to mathematical analysis carries its own kind of numbers to be defined in terms of that object and its intrinsic
