and when I had to choose one or the other, I usually chose the beautiful" (quoted in [**45**, p. 161]).

Weyl's return to Gottingen in 1930 to take up Hilbert's chair was badly timed to coincide with the Nazis' rise to power. One contemporary privately remarked, "Prof. Weyl is a peculiar race mixture, at least seven parts Holstein and one part Jewish blood with the particular vasomotor irritability that one encounters relatively often in people from Holstein and Friesland" (quoted in [**49**, p. 52]). Whatever vasomotor dysfunction may have resulted from the German components of his blood, it clearly paled in comparison with the trouble that his Jewish ancestry could cause him in Nazi Germany. Although Weyl's low Jewish blood count exempted him from the Nazis' direct attacks, his wife and children would have become targets of anti-Semitic measures. Having barely returned to his homeland, Weyl had to face the prospect of immigration again. The decision was difficult. At first he rejected an invitation to join the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study, unable to overcome "the love that binds me with every string of my heart to the German language" (quoted in [**52**, p. 271]). But when Hitler came to power, Weyl's head prevailed over his heart, and his family left for America.

Upon his arrival at Princeton, Weyl plunged into a mathematical culture quite inhospitable to the speculative philosophy so dear to him. Weyl perceived the "danger of a too thorough specialization and technicalization" of American mathematical research that produced "a mode of writing which must give the reader the impression of being shut up in a brightly illuminated cell where every detail sticks out with the same dazzling clarity, but without relief". Personally Weyl preferred "the open landscape under a clear sky with its depth of perspective, where the wealth of sharply defined nearby details gradually fades away toward the horizon" [**57**, p. viii].

In 1939, struggling with the "yoke of foreign language", imposed upon his writing, Weyl summed up his results on group invariants and representations in the book *The Classical Groups* [**57**, p. viii]. As Sir Michael Atiyah has noted, this volume "is not a linear book with a beginning, middle, and end. It is more like an elaborate painting that
