has to be studied from different angles and in different lights. It is the despair of the student and the delight of the professor" [**3**, p. 328].

Weyl viewed his mathematical writings as works of art, as much as science. "My own mathematical works are always quite unsystematic, without mode or connection", he admitted. "Expression and shape are almost more to me than knowledge itself. But I believe that, leaving aside my own peculiar nature, there is in mathematics itself, in contrast to the experimental disciplines, a character which is nearer to that of free creative art" (quoted in [**3**, p. 323]). Weyl believed that "'mathematizing' may well be a creative activity of man, like language or music, of primary originality, whose historical decisions defy complete objective rationalization" [**58**, p. 550].

In the artistry of mathematical creativity, in the beauty of formulas, in the eternal truths of mathematics sought Weyl a refuge from the horrors of the world wars and from the destruction of European culture [**53**, p. 365]. Yet after Hiroshima he realized that even pretty formulas may have deadly uses. "To what extent shall and can the theorist take responsibility for the practical consequences of his discoveries?" he asked. "What a beautiful theoretical edifice is quantum physics — and what a terrible thing is the atomic bomb!". Weyl disagreed with G. H. Hardy's defense of pure mathematics as a useless and harmless pursuit of beauty. Weyl insisted that the very meaning and value of mathematics were questioned "by the deadly menace of its misuse" (quoted in [**49**, p. 67–68]). He saw in mathematics the same moral choices that one faced in real life. His earlier reflections on the "metaphysical implications" of knowledge now acquired a broader meaning. "Mathematics is not the rigid and uninspiring schematism which the layman is so apt to see in it", he had written. "On the contrary, we stand in mathematics precisely at that point of intersection of limitation and freedom which is the essence of man himself" [**59**, p. 68].
