## 6.1. Problems

**Theorem.** *A connected quiver $Q$ is of finite type if and only if the corresponding unoriented graph (i.e., with directions of arrows forgotten) is a Dynkin diagram (see Theorem 6.5.2 below).*

In this problem you will prove the "only if" direction of this theorem (i.e., why other quivers are NOT of finite type).

(a) Suppose $Q$ has $n$ vertices and no self-loops. Show that for any rational numbers $x_i$, $1 \leq i \leq n$, which are not simultaneously zero, one has $q(x_1, \ldots, x_n) > 0$, where

$$
q(x_1, \ldots, x_n) := \sum_{i \in D} x_i^2 - \sum_{i,j \in D} b_{ij} x_i x_j.
$$

Hint: It suffices to check the result for integers: $x_i = m_i$. First assume that $m_i \geq 0$, and consider the space $W$ of representations $V$ of $Q$ such that $\dim V_i = m_i$. Show that the group $\prod_i GL_{m_i}(k)$ acts with finitely many orbits on $W \oplus k$, and use Problem 6.1.2 to derive the inequality. Then deduce the result in the case when $m_i$ are arbitrary integers.

(b) Deduce that $q$ is a positive definite quadratic form.

Hint: Use the fact that $\mathbb{Q}$ is dense in $\mathbb{R}$.

(c) Show that a quiver of finite type can have no self-loops. Then, using Problem 6.1.3, deduce the theorem.

**Problem 6.1.6.** Let $G \neq \{1\}$ be a finite subgroup of $SU(2)$ and let $V$ be the 2-dimensional representation of $G$ coming from its embedding into $SU(2)$. Let $V_i$, $i \in I$, be all the irreducible representations of $G$. Let $r_{ij}$ be the multiplicity of $V_i$ in $V \otimes V_j$.

(a) Show that $r_{ij} = r_{ji}$.

(b) The **McKay graph** of $G$, $M(G)$, is the graph whose vertices are labeled by $i \in I$, and $i$ is connected to $j$ by $r_{ij}$ edges. Show that $M(G)$ is connected. (Use Problem 4.12.10.)

(c) Show that $M(G)$ is an affine Dynkin diagram (one of the "forbidden" graphs in Problem 6.1.3). For this, show that the matrix $a_{ij} = 2\delta_{ij} - r_{ij}$ is positive semidefinite but not definite, and use Problem 6.1.3.

Hint: Let $f = \sum x_i \chi_{V_i}$, where $\chi_{V_i}$ are the characters of $V_i$. Show directly that $((2 - \chi_V)f, f) \geq 0$. When is it equal to 0? Next, show
