that $M(G)$ has no self-loops by using the fact that if $G$ is not cyclic, then $G$ contains the central element $-\text{Id} \in SU(2)$.

(d) Which groups from Problem 4.12.8 correspond to which diagrams?

(e) Using the McKay graph, find the dimensions of irreducible representations of all finite $G \subset SU(2)$ (namely, show that they are the numbers labeling the vertices of the affine Dynkin diagrams on our pictures). Compare with the results on subgroups of $SO(3)$ we obtained in Problem 4.12.8.

## 6.2. Indecomposable representations of the quivers $A_1$, $A_2$, $A_3$

We have seen that a central question about representations of quivers is whether a certain connected quiver has only finitely many indecomposable representations. In the previous subsection it is shown that only those quivers whose underlying undirected graph is a Dynkin diagram may have this property. To see if they actually do have this property, we first explicitly decompose representations of certain easy quivers.

**Remark 6.2.1.** By an object of the type $1 \xrightarrow{} 0$ we mean a map from a 1-dimensional vector space to the zero space. Similarly, an object of the type $0 \xrightarrow{} 1$ is a map from the zero space into a 1-dimensional space. The object $1 \xrightarrow{} 1$ means an isomorphism from a 1-dimensional to another 1-dimensional space. The numbers in such diagrams always mean the dimension of the attached spaces and the maps are the canonical maps (unless specified otherwise).

**Example 6.2.2** ($A_1$). The quiver $A_1$ consists of a single vertex and has no edges. Since a representation of this quiver is just a single vector space, the only indecomposable representation is the ground field (= a 1-dimensional space).

**Example 6.2.3** ($A_2$). The quiver $A_2$ consists of two vertices connected by a single edge:

$$\bullet \xrightarrow{} \bullet$$
