Let $Q'$ be the quiver $Q$ with orientation modified by the element $s_q \ldots s_{n-1} s_n$. We let $k_{(i)}$ be the representation of $Q'$ having dimension vector $\alpha_i$. Then we define

$$
V = F_n^- F_{n-1}^- \ldots F_q^- k_{(i)}.
$$

This is an indecomposable representation of $Q$ and

$$
d(V) = \alpha.
$$

$\square$

**Example 6.8.5.** Let us demonstrate by example how reflection functors work. Consider the quiver $D_4$ with the orientation of all arrows towards the node (which is labeled by 4). Start with the 1-dimensional representation $V_{\alpha_4}$ sitting at the fourth vertex. Apply to $V_{\alpha_4}$ the functor $F_3^- F_2^- F_1^-$. This yields

$$
F_1^- F_2^- F_3^- V_{\alpha_4} = V_{\alpha_1 + \alpha_2 + \alpha_3 + \alpha_4}.
$$

Now applying $F_4^-$, we get

$$
F_4^- F_1^- F_2^- F_3^- V_{\alpha_4} = V_{\alpha_1 + \alpha_2 + \alpha_3 + 2\alpha_4}.
$$

Note that this is exactly the inclusion of three lines into the plane, which is the most complicated indecomposable representation of the $D_4$ quiver.

## 6.9. Problems

**Problem 6.9.1.** Let $Q_n$ be the **cyclic quiver** of length $n$, i.e., $n$ vertices connected by $n$ oriented edges forming a cycle. Obviously, the classification of indecomposable representations of $Q_1$ is given by the Jordan normal form theorem. Obtain a similar classification of indecomposable representations of $Q_2$. In other words, classify pairs of linear operators $A : V \to W$ and $B : W \to V$ up to isomorphism. Namely:

(a) Consider the following pairs (for $n \geq 1$):

(1) $E_{n,\lambda}$: $V = W = \mathbb{C}^n$, $A$ is the Jordan block of size $n$ with eigenvalue $\lambda$, $B = 1$ ($\lambda \in \mathbb{C}$).

(2) $E_{n,\infty}$: is obtained from $E_{n,0}$ by exchanging $V$ with $W$ and $A$ with $B$.
