**Example 7.7.2.** The category of modules over an algebra $A$ and the category of finite dimensional modules over $A$ are abelian categories.

**Problem 7.7.3.** Let $A$ be a finitely generated commutative ring. Show that the category of finitely generated $A$-modules is an abelian category.

Hint: Use the Hilbert basis theorem.

We see from this definition that in an abelian category, $\operatorname{Hom}(X, Y)$ is an abelian group for each $X, Y$, compositions are group homomorphisms with respect to each argument, there is the zero object, the notions of an injective morphism (monomorphism) and surjective morphism (epimorphism), and every morphism has a kernel, a cokernel, and an image.

**Remark 7.7.4.** The good thing about Definition 7.7.1 is that it allows us to visualize objects, morphisms, kernels, and cokernels in terms of classical algebra. But the definition also has a big drawback, which is that even if $\mathcal{C}$ is the whole category $A$-mod, the ring $A$ is not determined by $\mathcal{C}$. In particular, two different rings can have equivalent categories of modules (such rings are called **Morita equivalent**). Actually, it is worse than that: for many important abelian categories there is no natural (or even manageable) ring $A$ at all. This is why people prefer to use the standard definition, which is free from this drawback, even though it is more abstract.

Let $k$ be a field. We say that an abelian category $\mathcal{C}$ is $k$-**linear** if the groups $\operatorname{Hom}_\mathcal{C}(X, Y)$ are equipped with a structure of a vector space over $k$ and composition maps are $k$-linear in each argument. In particular, the categories in Example 7.7.2 are $k$-linear.

## 7.8. Complexes and cohomology

**Definition 7.8.1.** A sequence of objects $C_i, i \in \mathbb{Z}$, of an abelian category $\mathcal{C}$ and morphisms $d_i : C_i \to C_{i+1}$ is said to be **a complex** if the composition of any two consecutive arrows is zero. The morphisms $d_i$ are called the **differentials**.$^1$ The **cohomology** of this complex is

$^1$A famous example of a complex is the **de Rham complex**, in which $C_m$ is the space of differential $m$-forms on a Euclidean space or, more generally, a manifold, and $d_m$ is the exterior differential of differential forms. This explains the term "differential".
