**Definition 7.9.4.** An abelian category $\mathcal{C}$ is **semisimple** if any short exact sequence in this category splits, i.e., is isomorphic to a sequence

$$
0 \to X \to X \oplus Y \to Y \to 0
$$

(where the maps are obvious).

**Example 7.9.5.** The category of representations of a finite group $G$ over a field of characteristic not dividing $|G|$ (or $0$) is semisimple.

Note that in a semisimple category, any additive functor is automatically exact on both sides.

**Example 7.9.6.** (i) The functors $\operatorname{Ind}_K^G$, $\operatorname{Res}_K^G$ are exact.

(ii) The functor $\operatorname{Hom}(X, ?)$ is left exact, but not necessarily right exact. To see that it need not be right exact, it suffices to consider the exact sequence

$$
0 \to \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z} \to 0
$$

and to apply the functor $\operatorname{Hom}(\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}, ?)$.

(iii) The functor $X \otimes_A$ for a right $A$-module $X$ (on the category of left $A$-modules) is right exact but not necessarily left exact. To see this, it suffices to tensor multiply the above exact sequence by $\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$.

**Exercise 7.9.7.** Show that if $(F, G)$ is a pair of adjoint additive functors between abelian categories, then $F$ is right exact and $G$ is left exact.

**Exercise 7.9.8.** (a) Let $Q$ be a quiver and let $i \in Q$ be a source. Let $V$ be a representation of $Q$ and let $W$ be a representation of $\overline{Q}_i$ (the quiver obtained from $Q$ by reversing arrows at the vertex $i$). Prove that there is a natural isomorphism between $\operatorname{Hom}(F_i^- V, W)$ and $\operatorname{Hom}(V, F_i^+ W)$. In other words, the functor $F_i^+$ is right adjoint to $F_i^-$.

(b) Deduce that the functor $F_i^+$ is left exact and $F_i^-$ is right exact.
