common schemes of proof in Russell and Whitehead's *Principia Mathematica* with the aim of abbreviating and perhaps mechanizing new proofs. The thesis was "naïve in supposing that all mathematics would be *actually* written in Whitehead and Russell style", Mac Lane admitted. Mac Lane was in Göttingen in 1933, when Hitler came to power, and he witnessed the ruthless destruction of the Hilbert school, as many leading Jewish mathematicians, including Courant and Noether, were dismissed from their jobs. The once famous mathematics department became "but a skeleton". Mac Lane rushed up to finish his thesis. Unimpressive by Göttingen standards, the thesis was accepted with the grade *Genügend*, the lowest grade. Mac Lane became the last American to earn a doctorate in the famous Hilbert school. One more thing Mac Lane managed to do before departure was to get married to Dorothy Jones. Being at Göttingen as he was, Mac Lane went to hear a mathematical lecture right after his wedding ceremony [**33**, pp. 48, 54, 51–52, 58, 52, 56].

In the 1930s mathematical logic was looked down upon by most mathematicians, who considered it part of philosophy rather than of mathematics proper. When he started teaching as an instructor at Harvard, Mac Lane intended to offer a logic course, but departmental needs forced him to lecture on algebra. Eventually he realized that it was easier to get a job as an algebraist than as a logician. In 1941, Mac Lane and Garrett Birkhoff co-authored *Survey of Modern Algebra*, the first American undergraduate textbook that espoused the abstract approach of Emmy Noether and B. L. van der Waerden. Initially judged as a text that "won't fly beyond the Hudson", the book eventually became a standard textbook for undergraduate algebra courses [**33**, pp. 62, 68, 82].

In the spring of 1941, Mac Lane received a semester leave from Harvard and applied to visit the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton. His application was turned down, and Mac Lane ended up going to the University of Michigan to give a series of six lectures. One of the Michigan mathematicians in the audience was Samuel ("Sammy") Eilenberg (1913–1988). He sat through the first five lectures but had to miss the last one, and he asked Mac Lane to give him the gist of it privately. Mac Lane did, and Eilenberg noticed a
