similarity between Mac Lane's results on group extensions and his colleague Norman Steenrod's homology theory of solenoid-type spaces. "It was startling" to find that connection, Mac Lane later recalled. They stayed up all night and by morning they found not only "a new intrusion of algebra into topology" but also formed a lifelong collaborative duet, which eventually churned out 15 joint papers. Mac Lane later remarked that the rejection of his application to Princeton was fortuitous, for "had it been accepted, I might have missed working with Sammy" [**33**, pp. 101–104].

A Polish Jew, Eilenberg left Poland shortly before the start of World War II, following the truly wise advice of his father, once the best student in his town's yeshiva. Among other European refugee mathematicians, Eilenberg was welcomed by Oswald Veblen and Solomon Lefschetz of Princeton University, who helped him find a position at Michigan. For Eilenberg, mathematics was a social activity. "Though his mathematical ideas may seem to have a kind of crystalline austerity, Sammy was a warm, robust, and very animated human being", whose charm and humor were "hard to resist", recalled his former colleague [**6**, pp. 1351–1352]. Described as "energetic . . . , expressive, charismatic, quick witted, often confrontational, and a brilliant thinker and good-humored conversationalist", Eilenberg easily established contacts [**7**, p. 360]. His entire career was punctuated by various productive collaborations. Together with Steenrod, he "drained the Pontine Marshes of homology theory, turning an ugly morass of variously motivated constructions into a simple and elegant system of axioms applied, for the first time, to functors". In collaboration with Henri Cartan, Eilenberg systematized homology theories in their *Homological Algebra* (1956). This field developed so rapidly that within a few years Alexander Grothendieck reportedly branded this foundational text "le diplodocus", relegating it to the subject of paleontology [**6**, p. 1348].

Eilenberg believed that "the highest value in mathematics was to be found, not in specious depth nor in the overcoming of overwhelming difficulty, but rather in providing the definitive clarity that would illuminate its underlying order". He insisted on "lucidity, order, and understanding as opposed to trophy hunting". Eilenberg was called
