a cautious approach, which outweighed them [**39**, p. 5]. While genuinely interested in incorporating category theory, Bourbaki found it very difficult to abandon its prewar foundational concept of *structure*. Switching to categories would mean revising the whole body of previous work, while combining the two approaches seemed to undermine the Bourbakist ideal of unity of mathematics [**5**, p. 236]. "My facility in the French language was not sufficient to categorize Bourbaki", remarked Mac Lane. As a result, important parts of recent mathematical research fell out of Bourbaki's purview, perhaps contributing to the decline of their overall project. Mac Lane barely hid his disappointment in the outcome, calling the Bourbaki oeuvre a "magnificent multi-volume monster" and Bourbaki's definition of *structure* "a cumbersome piece of pedantry", which even Bourbaki never used (quoted in [**39**, p. 6]).

Ironically, the Bourbakist vision of unified mathematics found a powerful vehicle in category theory. General category-theoretical concepts have enjoyed wide use across many different mathematical fields; in fact, the very rigid division of mathematics into fields has been called into question. "Mathematics as it is today . . . can no longer be presented by piecemeal courses", argued Mac Lane in a 1954 talk, "for it is simply no longer true that advanced mathematics can be split neatly into compartments labelled 'algebra', 'analysis', 'geometry', and 'applied mathematics' ". He championed the "infusion of a geometrical point of view" and reminded his audience that "a vector is geometrical". "A vector is not an $n$-tuple of numbers until a coordinate system has been chosen. Any teacher and any text book which starts with the idea that vectors are $n$-tuples is committing a crime for which the proper punishment is ridicule" (quoted in [**40**, p. 245]).

Mac Lane's favorite pastime was sailing, which he considered "a much more serious sport" than skiing, which he had learned at Göttingen. On some sailing expeditions he spent time with prominent philosophers but showed little interest in their subject. "Thankfully, we paid more attention to sailing than to philosophical doctrine", he recalled. He found that most studies in philosophy of mathematics "paid little attention to the actual substance of mathematics beyond
