the most elementary concerns" and set out to repair the situation. In his 1986 book *Mathematics, Form and Function*, Mac Lane quickly dispatched with an array of mathematical philosophies, from set theory ("often artificial") to formalism ("can't explain *which* of many formulas matter") to intuitionism ("can be dogmatic") to empiricism ("mathematics originates not just in facts") to Platonism ("a useful mythology and a speculative ontology"). He even dismissed the Romantic ideal of mathematics as "a search for austere forms of beauty" and offered instead "formal functionalism" — his vision of mathematics as "an extensive network of formal rules, definitions and systems, tightly tied here and there to activities and to science". Since mathematical entities do not necessarily correspond to any physical objects, Mac Lane argued, it would be meaningless to ask if mathematics is true. The "appropriate" questions about a particular piece of mathematics are different: is it correct (i.e., proved), responsive to some problem, illuminating, promising, relevant? According to Mac Lane, mathematics is *correct* but not *true* [**33**, pp. 143, 145, 455–456, 440, 441, 443].

Like Mac Lane, Eilenberg "had no patience for metaphysical argument" (Heller in [**6**, p. 1349]). He had his own passion outside mathematics, however. "A sophisticated and wise man who took a refined pleasure in life" (Bass in [**6**, p. 1352]), Eilenberg, in fact, had a parallel life. Known as "Sammy" to mathematicians, Eilenberg was equally famous as an art dealer and collector under the nickname "Professor" in the art world. Over the years, he amassed one of the most significant collections of Southeast Asian sculpture in the world and became a leading expert in the field. His biographer surmised that Eilenberg "found in ancient Hindu sculpture a formal elegance and imagination that resonated well with the same aesthetic sensibility — 'classical rather than romantic,' in the words of Alex Heller — that animated his mathematical work" [**7**, p. 362]. Eilenberg's two lives rarely intersected. His colleagues recalled only one occasion on which he "moved from a conversation about sculpture to one about mathematics. Sculptors, he said, learn early to create from the inside out: what finally is to be seen on the surface is the result of a lot of work in conceptualizing the interior. But there are others for whom the interior is the result of a lot of work on getting the surface
