Hint: Show first that $\operatorname{Tor}_i^A(M, N)$ can be computed by tensoring two projective resolutions, for $M$ and for $N$, and computing cohomology.

(v) Let $0 \to M_1 \to M_2 \to M_3 \to 0$ be a short exact sequence of left $A$-modules. Let $P_\bullet^1$ and $P_\bullet^3$ be projective resolutions of $M_1$ and $M_3$. Construct a projective resolution of $M_2$ with terms $P_i^2 := P_i^1 \oplus P_i^3$ (use Exercise 8.1.4). Use it to show that for any left $A$-module $N$ there are long exact sequences

$$
0 \to \operatorname{Hom}_A(M_3, N) \to \operatorname{Hom}_A(M_2, N) \to \operatorname{Hom}_A(M_1, N) \to
$$

$$
\operatorname{Ext}^1(M_3, N) \to \operatorname{Ext}^1(M_2, N) \to \operatorname{Ext}^1(M_1, N) \to \operatorname{Ext}^2(M_3, N) \to \ldots
$$

and

$$
\cdots \to \operatorname{Tor}_2(M_3, N) \to \operatorname{Tor}_1(M_1, N) \to \operatorname{Tor}_1(M_2, N) \to \operatorname{Tor}_1(M_3, N)
$$

$$
\to M_1 \otimes_A N \to M_2 \otimes_A N \to M_3 \otimes_A N \to 0.
$$

**Problem 8.2.7.** (i) Let $A = \mathbb{Z}$ and let $M, N$ be finitely generated abelian groups. Compute $\operatorname{Tor}_i(M, N)$, $\operatorname{Ext}^i(M, N)$ (Hint: Reduce to the case of cyclic groups using the classification theorem for finite abelian groups.)

(ii) Do the same for $A = k[x]$ and $M, N$ being any finitely generated $A$-modules.

**Problem 8.2.8.** Show that if $A_1, A_2$ are algebras over a field $k$ and $M_i, N_i$ are left $A_i$-modules, then

$$
\operatorname{Tor}_i^{A_1 \otimes A_2}(M_1 \otimes M_2, N_1 \otimes N_2) = \bigoplus_{j+m=i} \operatorname{Tor}_j^{A_1}(M_1, N_1) \otimes \operatorname{Tor}_m^{A_2}(M_2, N_2).
$$

Similarly,

$$
\operatorname{Ext}^i_{A_1 \otimes A_2}(M_1 \otimes M_2, N_1 \otimes N_2) = \bigoplus_{j+m=i} \operatorname{Ext}^j_{A_1}(M_1, N_1) \otimes \operatorname{Ext}^m_{A_2}(M_2, N_2),
$$

if $N_i$ are finite dimensional.

In a similar way one can define Tor and Ext groups in any abelian category which has **enough projectives**; i.e., any object is a quotient of a projective object (this condition insures that every object has a projective resolution).
