*(ii)* $A = \bigoplus_{i=1}^n (\dim M_i) P_i$.

*(iii) Any indecomposable finitely generated projective module over $A$ is isomorphic to $P_i$ for some $i$.*

**Proof.** Recall that $A / \operatorname{Rad}(A) = \bigoplus_{i=1}^n \operatorname{End}(M_i)$ and that $\operatorname{Rad}(A)$ is a nilpotent ideal. Pick a basis of $M_i$, and let $e_{ij}^0 = E_{jj}^i$, the rank 1 projectors projecting to the basis vectors of this basis ($j = 1, \ldots, \dim M_i$). Then $e_{ij}^0$ are orthogonal idempotents in $A / \operatorname{Rad}(A)$. So by Corollary 9.1.3 we can lift them to orthogonal idempotents $e_{ij}$ in $A$. Now define $P_{ij} = Ae_{ij}$. Then $A = \bigoplus_i \bigoplus_{j=1}^{\dim M_i} P_{ij}$, so $P_{ij}$ are projective. Also, we have $\operatorname{Hom}(P_{ij}, M_k) = e_{ij} M_k$, so $\dim \operatorname{Hom}(P_{ij}, M_k) = \delta_{ik}$. Finally, $P_{ij}$ is independent of $j$ up to an isomorphism, as $e_{ij}$ for fixed $i$ are conjugate under $A^\times$ by Proposition 9.1.1; thus we will denote $P_{ij}$ by $P_i$.

We claim that $P_i$ is indecomposable. Indeed, if $P_i = Q_1 \oplus Q_2$, then $\operatorname{Hom}(Q_l, M_j) = 0$ for all $j$ either for $l = 1$ or for $l = 2$, so either $Q_1 = 0$ or $Q_2 = 0$.

Also, there can be no other indecomposable finitely generated projective modules, since any indecomposable projective module has to occur in the decomposition of $A$. The theorem is proved. $\square$

**Definition 9.2.2.** The projective module $P_i$ is called the **projective cover** of $M_i$.

**Proposition 9.2.3.** *Let $N$ be any finite dimensional $A$-module. Then one has $\dim \operatorname{Hom}_A(P_i, N) = [N : M_i]$, the multiplicity of occurrence on $M_i$ in the Jordan-Hölder series of $N$.*

**Proof.** If $N = M_j$, the statement is clear. Also, if

$$
0 \to N_1 \to N_2 \to N_3 \to 0
$$

is an exact sequence of $A$-modules, then the corresponding sequence

$$
0 \to \operatorname{Hom}_A(P_i, N_1) \to \operatorname{Hom}_A(P_i, N_2) \to \operatorname{Hom}_A(P_i, N_3) \to 0
$$

is exact, as $P_i$ is projective. This implies the statement. $\square$
