Here we agree that $X$ is linked to itself (by a chain of length 0).

This linking relation is clearly an equivalence relation, so it defines a splitting of the set $S$ of isomorphism classes of simple $A$-modules into equivalence classes $S_k$, $k \in B$. The $k$th **block** $\mathcal{C}_k$ of $\mathcal{C}$ is, by definition, the category of all objects $M$ of $\mathcal{C}$ such that all simple modules occurring in the Jordan-Hölder series of $M$ are in $S_k$.

**Example 9.5.2.** If $A$ is semisimple, each block is equivalent to the category of vector spaces (and thus has only one simple object). If $A$ is a commutative local artinian algebra, then there is only one block. Also there is just one block for the algebra of Problem 9.3.2.

**Problem 9.5.3.** (i) Show that there is a natural bijection between blocks of $\mathcal{C}$ and indecomposable central idempotents $e_k$ of $A$ (i.e., ones that cannot be nontrivially split in a sum of two central idempotents), such that $\mathcal{C}_k$ is the category of finite dimensional $e_k A$-modules.

(ii) Show that any indecomposable object of $\mathcal{C}$ lies in some $\mathcal{C}_k$ and that $\operatorname{Hom}(M, N) = 0$ if $M \in \mathcal{C}_k$, $N \in \mathcal{C}_l$, $k \neq l$. Thus, $\mathcal{C} = \bigoplus_{k \in B} \mathcal{C}_k$.

(iii) Determine the blocks in the category of left $A$-modules for $A = k[S_3]$, where $k$ is of characteristic 2.

## 9.6. Finite abelian categories

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a $k$-linear abelian category in which any object has finite length (i.e., a finite filtration whose successive quotients are simple). Assume that for every simple object $X$ of $\mathcal{C}$, one has $\operatorname{End}(X) = k$. Note that in such a category, Hom spaces are finite dimensional (check it!).

**Definition 9.6.1.** Let us say that $\mathcal{C}$ is **finite** if it has enough projectives and finitely many simple objects (up to an isomorphism).

For example, as we have shown, the category of finite dimensional modules over a finite dimensional algebra is finite. Below we will see that the converse is also true.

**Definition 9.6.2.** An object $P$ of an abelian category $\mathcal{C}$ is said to be a **projective generator** (or **progenerator**) if it is projective and every object is a quotient of a multiple of $P$.
