Find the Hilbert series of the following graded algebras:

(a) $A = k[x_1, \ldots, x_m]$ (where the grading is by degree of polynomials).

(b) $A = k\langle x_1, \ldots, x_m \rangle$ (the grading is by length of words).

(c) $A$ is the exterior (= Grassmann) algebra $\wedge_k[x_1, \ldots, x_m]$ generated over some field $k$ by $x_1, \ldots, x_m$ with the defining relations $x_i x_j + x_j x_i = 0$ and $x_i^2 = 0$ for all $i, j$ (the grading is by degree).

(d) $A$ is the path algebra $P_Q$ of a quiver $Q$ (the grading is defined by $\deg(p_i) = 0$, $\deg(a_h) = 1$).

Hint: The closed answer is written in terms of the adjacency matrix $M_Q$ of $Q$.

## 2.9. Lie algebras

Let $\mathfrak{g}$ be a vector space over a field $k$, and let $[\ ,\ ] : \mathfrak{g} \times \mathfrak{g} \longrightarrow \mathfrak{g}$ be a skew-symmetric bilinear map. (That is, $[a, a] = 0$, and hence $[a, b] = -[b, a]$.)

**Definition 2.9.1.** $(\mathfrak{g}, [\ ,\ ])$ is a **Lie algebra** if $[\ ,\ ]$ satisfies the Jacobi identity

$$
(2.9.1) \qquad [[a, b], c] + [[b, c], a] + [[c, a], b] = 0.
$$

**Example 2.9.2.** Some examples of Lie algebras are:

(1) Any space $\mathfrak{g}$ with $[\ ,\ ] = 0$ (abelian Lie algebra).

(2) Any associative algebra $A$ with $[a, b] = ab - ba$, in particular, the endomorphism algebra $A = \operatorname{End}(V)$, where $V$ is a vector space. When such an $A$ is regarded as a Lie algebra, it is often denoted by $\mathfrak{gl}(V)$ (general linear Lie algebra).

(3) Any subspace $U$ of an associative algebra $A$ such that $[a, b] \in U$ for all $a, b \in U$.

(4) The space $\operatorname{Der}(A)$ of derivations of an algebra $A$, i.e. linear maps $D : A \to A$ which satisfy the Leibniz rule:

$$
D(ab) = D(a)b + aD(b).
$$
