[**26**] Hermann, Robert. "Preface". In *Lie Groups: History, Frontiers and Applications*, vol. 3 (Brookline, MA: Math Sci Press, 1976), pp. iii–iv.

[**27**] Kimberling, Clark. "Dedekind letters"; http://faculty.evansville.edu/ck6/bstud/dedek.html.

[**28**] Krömer, Ralf. *Tool and Object: A History and Philosophy of Category Theory* (Basel: Birkhäuser, 2007).

[**29**] Lam, T. Y. "Representations of finite groups: A hundred years: Part I". *Notices of the AMS* 45:3 (1998): 361–372.

[**30**] Lam, T. Y. "Representations of Finite Groups: A Hundred Years: Part II". *Notices of the AMS* 45:4 (1998): 465–474.

[**31**] Landry, Elaine, and Jean-Pierre Marquis. "Categories in Context: Historical, Foundational, and Philosophical". *Philosophia Mathematica* 13 (2005): 1–43.

[**32**] Lawvere, F. W., and Colin McLarty. "Mac Lane, Saunders". *New Dictionary of Scientific Biography*, vol. 23 (Detroit, MI: Charles Scribner's Sons, 2008), pp. 1–5.

[**33**] Mac Lane, Saunders. *A Mathematical Autobiography* (Wellesley, MA: A.K. Peters, 2005).

[**34**] Mac Lane, Saunders. *Mathematics, Form and Function* (New York: Springer, 1986).

[**35**] Mac Lane, Saunders. "Concepts and Categories in Perspective". In *A Century of Mathematics in America*, ed. Peter Duren, Part I (Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1988), pp. 323–365.

[**36**] Mac Lane, Saunders. "Mathematics at the University of Chicago: A Brief History". In *A Century of Mathematics in America*, ed. Peter Duren, Part II (Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 1989), pp. 127–154.

[**37**] Mac Lane, Saunders. "The PNAS way back then". *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94 (June 1997): 5983–5985.

[**38**] Marquis, Jean-Pierre. *From a Geometrical Point of View: A Study of the History and Philosophy of Category Theory* (New York: Springer, 2009).

[**39**] McLarty, Colin. "The Last Mathematician from Hilbert's Göttingen: Saunders Mac Lane as Philosopher of Mathematics". *British Journal for the Philosophy of Science* 58:1 (2007): 1–36.

[**40**] McLarty, Colin. "Saunders Mac Lane (1909–2005): His Mathematical Life and Philosophical Works". *Philosophia Mathematica* 13 (2005): 237–251.

[**41**] Neumann, Peter M. "The Context of Burnside's Contributions to Group Theory". In *The Collected Papers of William Burnside*, vol. 1, pp. 15–54.
