[**22**, p. 77]. Lie read and revised Engel's notes, eventually producing the first draft of a book-length manuscript.

When Klein left Leipzig to take up a professorship at Göttingen, he arranged for the vacated chair of geometry to be offered to Lie. Lie somewhat reluctantly left his homeland and arrived at Leipzig with the intention of building "a healthy mathematical school" there [**22**, p. 226]. He continued his collaboration with Engel, which culminated in the publication of their joint three-volume work, *Theorie der Transformationsgruppen*.

Lie's ideas began to spread around Europe, finding a particularly fertile ground in Paris. Inspired by Lie, Henri Poincaré remarked that all mathematics was a tale about groups, and Émile Picard wrote to Lie, "Paris is becoming a center for groups; it is all fermenting in young minds, and one will have an excellent wine after the liquors have settled a bit". German mathematicians were less impressed. Weierstrass believed that Lie's theory lacked rigor and had to be rebuilt from the foundations, and Frobenius labeled it a "theory of methods" for solving differential equations in a roundabout way, instead of the natural methods of Euler and Lagrange [**22**, pp. 186, 188–189].

Students flocked to Lie's lectures on his own research, but this only exacerbated his heavy teaching load at Leipzig — 8–10 lectures per week — compared to the leisurely pace of his work in Christiania. An outdoor man, who was used to weeks-long hikes in Norway, Lie felt homesick, longing for the forests and mountains of his native country. All this began taking its toll on Lie. Most importantly, he felt underappreciated and became obsessed with the idea that others plundered his work and betrayed his trust. His relations with colleagues gradually deteriorated, particularly with those closest to him. He broke with Engel and eventually with Klein. Lie felt that his role in the development of the Erlangen Program was undervalued, and he publicly attacked Klein, claiming, "I am no pupil of Klein, nor is the opposite the case, although this might be closer to the truth. I value Klein's talent highly and will never forget the sympathetic interest with which he has always followed my scientific endeavors. But I do
