linear group over $\mathbb{C}$, representations of $GL_2(\mathbb{F}_q)$, representations of semidirect products, etc.

In Chapter 6, we give an introduction to the representation theory of quivers (starting with the problem of the classification of configurations of $n$ subspaces in a vector space) and present a proof of Gabriel's theorem, which classifies quivers of finite type.

In Chapter 7, we give an introduction to category theory, in particular, abelian categories, and explain how such categories arise in representation theory.

In Chapter 8, we give a brief introduction to homological algebra and explain how it can be applied to categories of representations.

Finally, in Chapter 9 we give a short introduction to the representation theory of finite dimensional algebras.

Besides, the book contains six historical interludes written by Dr. Slava Gerovitch.$^1$ These interludes, written in an accessible and absorbing style, tell about the life and mathematical work of some of the mathematicians who played a major role in the development of modern algebra and representation theory: F. G. Frobenius, S. Lie, W. Burnside, W. R. Hamilton, H. Weyl, S. Mac Lane, and S. Eilenberg. For more on the history of representation theory, we recommend that the reader consult the references to the historical interludes, in particular the excellent book [**Cu**].

**Acknowledgments.** This book arose from the lecture notes of a representation theory course given by the first author to the remaining six authors in March 2004 within the framework of the Clay Mathematics Institute Research Academy for high school students and its extended version given by the first author to MIT undergraduate mathematics students in the fall of 2008.

The authors are grateful to the Clay Mathematics Institute for hosting the first version of this course. The first author is very indebted to Victor Ostrik for helping him prepare this course and thanks

---

$^1$I wish to thank Prof. Pavel Etingof and his co-authors for adding technical notes to my historical monograph. While they have made a commendable effort at a concise exposition, their notes, unfortunately, have grown in size and in the end occupied a better part of this volume. I hope the reader will forgive this preponderance of technicalities in what, in essence, is a history book. — S. Gerovitch.
