If $V$ is an $(A, B)$-bimodule and $W$ is a $(B, C)$-bimodule, then these two structures on $V \otimes_B W$ can be combined into one $(A, C)$-bimodule structure on $V \otimes_B W$.

(a) Let $A$, $B$, $C$, $D$ be four algebras. Let $V$ be an $(A, B)$-bimodule, $W$ a $(B, C)$-bimodule, and $X$ a $(C, D)$-bimodule. Prove that $(V \otimes_B W) \otimes_C X \cong V \otimes_B (W \otimes_C X)$ as $(A, D)$-bimodules. The isomorphism (from left to right) is given by the formula

$$
(v \otimes_B w) \otimes_C x \mapsto v \otimes_B (w \otimes_C x)
$$

for all $v \in V$, $w \in W$, and $x \in X$.

(b) If $A$, $B$, $C$ are three algebras and if $V$ is an $(A, B)$-bimodule and $W$ an $(A, C)$-bimodule, then the vector space $\operatorname{Hom}_A(V, W)$ (the space of all left $A$-linear homomorphisms from $V$ to $W$) canonically becomes a $(B, C)$-bimodule by setting $(bf)(v) = f(vb)$ for all $b \in B$, $f \in \operatorname{Hom}_A(V, W)$, and $v \in V$ and setting $(fc)(v) = f(v) c$ for all $c \in C$, $f \in \operatorname{Hom}_A(V, W)$ and $v \in V$.

Let $A$, $B$, $C$, $D$ be four algebras. Let $V$ be a $(B, A)$-bimodule, $W$ a $(C, B)$-bimodule, and $X$ a $(C, D)$-bimodule. Prove that

$$
\operatorname{Hom}_B(V, \operatorname{Hom}_C(W, X)) \cong \operatorname{Hom}_C(W \otimes_B V, X)
$$

as $(A, D)$-bimodules. The isomorphism (from left to right) is given by

$$
f \mapsto (w \otimes_B v \mapsto f(v) w)
$$

for all $v \in V$, $w \in W$ and $f \in \operatorname{Hom}_B(V, \operatorname{Hom}_C(W, X))$.

**Exercise 2.11.7.** Show that if $M$ and $N$ are modules over a commutative ring $A$, then $M \otimes_A N$ has a natural structure of an $A$-module.

## 2.12. The tensor algebra

The notion of tensor product allows us to give more conceptual (i.e., coordinate-free) definitions of the free algebra, polynomial algebra, exterior algebra, and universal enveloping algebra of a Lie algebra.

Namely, given a vector space $V$, define its **tensor algebra** $TV$ over a field $k$ to be $TV = \bigoplus_{n \geq 0} V^{\otimes n}$, with multiplication defined by $a \cdot b := a \otimes b$, $a \in V^{\otimes n}$, $b \in V^{\otimes m}$. Observe that a choice of a basis
