$x_1, \ldots, x_N$ in $V$ defines an isomorphism of $TV$ with the free algebra $k\langle x_1, \ldots, x_n \rangle$.

Also, one can make the following definition.

**Definition 2.12.1.** (i) The **symmetric algebra** $SV$ of $V$ is the quotient of $TV$ by the ideal generated by $v \otimes w - w \otimes v$, $v, w \in V$.

(ii) The **exterior algebra** $\wedge V$ of $V$ is the quotient of $TV$ by the ideal generated by $v \otimes v$, $v \in V$.

(iii) If $V$ is a Lie algebra, the **universal enveloping algebra** $\mathcal{U}(V)$ of $V$ is the quotient of $TV$ by the ideal generated by $v \otimes w - w \otimes v - [v, w]$, $v, w \in V$.

It is easy to see that a choice of a basis $x_1, \ldots, x_N$ in $V$ identifies $SV$ with the polynomial algebra $k[x_1, \ldots, x_N]$, $\wedge V$ with the exterior algebra $\wedge_k(x_1, \ldots, x_N)$, and the universal enveloping algebra $\mathcal{U}(V)$ with one defined previously.

Moreover, it is easy to see that we have decompositions

$$SV = \bigoplus_{n \geq 0} S^n V, \quad \wedge V = \bigoplus_{n \geq 0} \wedge^n V.$$

## 2.13. Hilbert's third problem

**Problem 2.13.1.** It is known that if $A$ and $B$ are two polygons of the same area, then $A$ can be cut by finitely many straight cuts into pieces from which one can make $B$ (check it — it is fun!). David Hilbert asked in 1900 whether it is true for polyhedra in three dimensions. In particular, is it true for a cube and a regular tetrahedron of the same volume?

The answer is "no", as was found by Dehn in 1901. The proof is very beautiful. Namely, to any polyhedron $A$, let us attach its "Dehn invariant" $D(A)$ in $V = \mathbb{R} \otimes (\mathbb{R}/\mathbb{Q})$ (the tensor product of $\mathbb{Q}$-vector spaces). Namely,

$$D(A) = \sum_a l(a) \otimes \frac{\beta(a)}{\pi},$$

where $a$ runs over edges of $A$ and $l(a), \beta(a)$ are the length of $a$ and the dihedral angle at $a$.
