**Proof.** (i) Let $V$ be an irreducible representation of $A$. Let $v \in V$. Then $Iv \subset V$ is a subrepresentation. If $Iv \neq 0$, then $Iv = V$ so there is $x \in I$ such that $xv = v$. Then $x^n \neq 0$, a contradiction. Thus $Iv = 0$, so $I$ acts by $0$ in $V$ and hence $I \subset \operatorname{Rad}(A)$.

(ii) Let $0 = A_0 \subset A_1 \subset \cdots \subset A_n = A$ be a filtration of the regular representation of $A$ by subrepresentations such that $A_{i+1}/A_i$ are irreducible. It exists by Lemma 3.4.2. Let $x \in \operatorname{Rad}(A)$. Then $x$ acts on $A_{i+1}/A_i$ by zero, so $x$ maps $A_{i+1}$ to $A_i$. This implies that $\operatorname{Rad}(A)^n = 0$, as desired. $\square$

**Theorem 3.5.4.** *A finite dimensional algebra $A$ has only finitely many irreducible representations $V_i$ up to an isomorphism. These representations are finite dimensional, and*

$$A / \operatorname{Rad}(A) \cong \bigoplus_i \operatorname{End} V_i.$$

**Proof.** First, for any irreducible representation $V$ of $A$ and for any nonzero $v \in V$, $Av \subseteq V$ is a finite dimensional subrepresentation of $V$. (It is finite dimensional as $A$ is finite dimensional.) As $V$ is irreducible and $Av \neq 0$, $V = Av$ and $V$ is finite dimensional.

Next, suppose we have nonisomorphic irreducible representations $V_1, V_2, \ldots, V_r$. By Theorem 3.2.2, the homomorphism

$$\bigoplus_i \rho_i : A \longrightarrow \bigoplus_i \operatorname{End} V_i$$

is surjective. So $r \leq \sum_i \dim \operatorname{End} V_i \leq \dim A$. Thus, $A$ has only finitely many nonisomorphic irreducible representations (not more than $\dim A$).

Now, let $V_1, V_2, \ldots, V_r$ be all nonisomorphic irreducible finite dimensional representations of $A$. By Theorem 3.2.2, the homomorphism

$$\bigoplus_i \rho_i : A \longrightarrow \bigoplus_i \operatorname{End} V_i$$

is surjective. The kernel of this map, by definition, is exactly $\operatorname{Rad}(A)$. $\square$

**Corollary 3.5.5.** *$\sum_i (\dim V_i)^2 \leq \dim A$, where the $V_i$'s are the irreducible representations of $A$.*
