3.3.1, there are exactly $r$ irreducible representations of $A$ (isomorphic to $k^{d_1}, \ldots, k^{d_r}$, respectively) and therefore $r$ linearly independent characters on the $r$-dimensional vector space $A/[A, A]$. Thus, the characters form a basis. $\square$

## 3.7. The Jordan-Holder theorem

We will now state and prove two important theorems about representations of finite dimensional algebras — the Jordan-Holder theorem and the Krull-Schmidt theorem.

**Theorem 3.7.1** (Jordan-Holder theorem). *Let $V$ be a finite dimensional representation of $A$, and let $0 = V_0 \subset V_1 \subset \cdots \subset V_n = V$, $0 = V'_0 \subset \cdots \subset V'_m = V$ be filtrations of $V$, such that the representations $W_i := V_i/V_{i-1}$ and $W'_i := V'_i/V'_{i-1}$ are irreducible for all $i$. Then $n = m$, and there exists a permutation $\sigma$ of $1, \ldots, n$ such that $W_{\sigma(i)}$ is isomorphic to $W'_i$.*

**Proof.** *First proof* (for $k$ of characteristic zero). The character of $V$ obviously equals the sum of characters of $W_i$ and also the sum of characters of $W'_i$. But by Theorem 3.6.2, the characters of irreducible representations are linearly independent, so the multiplicity of every irreducible representation $W$ of $A$ among $W_i$ and among $W'_i$ is the same. This implies the theorem.[^5]

*Second proof* (general). The proof is by induction on $\dim V$. The base of induction is clear, so let us prove the induction step. If $W_1 = W'_1$ (as subspaces), we are done, since by the induction assumption the theorem holds for $V/W_1$. So assume $W_1 \neq W'_1$. In this case $W_1 \cap W'_1 = 0$ (as $W_1, W'_1$ are irreducible), so we have an embedding $f : W_1 \oplus W'_1 \to V$. Let $U = V/(W_1 \oplus W'_1)$, and let $0 = U_0 \subset U_1 \subset \cdots \subset U_p = U$ be a filtration of $U$ with simple quotients $Z_i = U_i/U_{i-1}$ (it exists by Lemma 3.4.2). Then we see the following:

1) $V/W_1$ has a filtration with successive quotients $W'_1, Z_1, \ldots, Z_p$ and another filtration with successive quotients $W_2, \ldots, W_n$.

[^5]: This proof does not work in characteristic $p$ because it only implies that the multiplicities of $W_i$ and $W'_i$ are the same modulo $p$, which is not sufficient. In fact, the character of the representation $pV$, where $V$ is any representation, is zero.
