**Proof.** (i) Generalized eigenspaces of $\theta$ are subrepresentations of $W$, and $W$ is their direct sum. Thus, $\theta$ can have only one eigenvalue $\lambda$. If $\lambda$ is zero, $\theta$ is nilpotent; otherwise it is an isomorphism.

(ii) The proof is by induction in $n$. The base is clear. To make the induction step ($n - 1$ to $n$), assume that $\theta$ is not nilpotent. Then by (i), $\theta$ is an isomorphism, so $\sum_{i=1}^n \theta^{-1} \theta_i = 1$. The morphisms $\theta^{-1} \theta_i$ are not isomorphisms, so they are nilpotent. Thus $1 - \theta^{-1} \theta_n = \theta^{-1} \theta_1 + \cdots + \theta^{-1} \theta_{n-1}$ is an isomorphism, which is a contradiction to the induction assumption. $\square$

By the lemma, we find that for some $s$, $\theta_s$ must be an isomorphism; we may assume that $s = 1$. In this case, $V'_1 = \operatorname{Im}(p'_1 i_1) \oplus \ker(p_1 i'_1)$, so since $V'_1$ is indecomposable, we get that $f := p'_1 i_1 : V_1 \to V'_1$ and $g := p_1 i'_1 : V'_1 \to V_1$ are isomorphisms.

Let $B = \bigoplus_{j>1} V_j$, $B' = \bigoplus_{j>1} V'_j$; then we have $V = V_1 \oplus B = V'_1 \oplus B'$. Consider the map $h : B \to B'$ defined as a composition of the natural maps $B \to V \to B'$ attached to these decompositions. We claim that $h$ is an isomorphism. To show this, it suffices to show that $\ker h = 0$ (as $h$ is a map between spaces of the same dimension). Assume that $v \in \ker h \subset B$. Then $v \in V'_1$. On the other hand, the projection of $v$ to $V_1$ is zero, so $gv = 0$. Since $g$ is an isomorphism, we get $v = 0$, as desired.

Now by the induction assumption, $m = n$, and $V_j \cong V'_{\sigma(j)}$ for some permutation $\sigma$ of $2, \ldots, n$. The theorem is proved. $\square$

**Problem 3.8.3.** The above proof of Lemma 3.8.2 uses the condition that $k$ is an algebraically closed field. Prove Lemma 3.8.2 (and hence the Krull-Schmidt theorem) without this condition.

**Problem 3.8.4.** (i) Let $V, W$ be finite dimensional representations of an algebra $A$ over a (not necessarily algebraically closed) field $K$. Let $L$ be a field extension of $K$. Suppose that $V \otimes_K L$ is isomorphic to $W \otimes_K L$ as a module over the $L$-algebra $A \otimes_K L$. Show that $V$ and $W$ are isomorphic as $A$-modules.

Hint: Reduce to the case of finitely generated, then finite extension, of some degree $n$. Then regard $V \otimes_K L$ and $W \otimes_K L$ as
