the same thing as a nondegenerate invariant sesquilinear form. So one can use a unitary structure on $V$ to define an isomorphism $\overline{V} \to V^*$.

**Theorem 4.6.3.** *A finite dimensional unitary representation $V$ of any group $G$ is completely reducible.*

**Proof.** Let $W$ be a subrepresentation of $V$. Let $W^\perp$ be the orthogonal complement of $W$ in $V$ under the Hermitian inner product. Then $W^\perp$ is a subrepresentation of $V$, and $V = W \oplus W^\perp$. This implies that $V$ is completely reducible. $\square$

Theorems 4.6.2 and 4.6.3 imply Maschke's theorem for complex representations (Theorem 4.1.1). Thus, we have obtained a new proof of this theorem over the field of complex numbers.

**Remark 4.6.4.** Theorem 4.6.3 shows that for infinite groups $G$, a finite dimensional representation may fail to admit a unitary structure (as there exist finite dimensional representations, e.g., for $G = \mathbb{Z}$, which are indecomposable but not irreducible).

## 4.7. Orthogonality of matrix elements

Let $V$ be an irreducible representation of a finite group $G$, and let $v_1, v_2, \ldots, v_n$ be an orthonormal basis of $V$ under the invariant Hermitian form. The matrix elements of $V$ are $t^V_{ij}(x) = (\rho_V(x)v_i, v_j)$.

**Proposition 4.7.1.** *(i) Matrix elements of nonisomorphic irreducible representations are orthogonal in $F(G, \mathbb{C})$ under the form $(f, g) = \frac{1}{|G|} \sum_{x \in G} f(x)\overline{g(x)}$.*

*(ii) One has $(t^V_{ij}, t^V_{i'j'}) = \delta_{ii'}\delta_{jj'} \cdot \frac{1}{\dim V}$.*

*Thus, matrix elements of irreducible representations of $G$ form an orthogonal basis of $F(G, \mathbb{C})$.*

**Proof.** Let $V$ and $W$ be two irreducible representations of $G$. Take $\{v_i\}$ to be an orthonormal basis of $V$ and $\{w_i\}$ to be an orthonormal basis of $W$ under their positive definite invariant Hermitian forms. Let $w^*_i \in W^*$ be the linear function on $W$ defined by taking the inner product with $w_i$: $w^*_i(u) = (u, w_i)$. Then for $x \in G$ we have
