Horse Trade" widely, taking his wife to trade exhibits and art shows, reading fiction, and clearing his garden of caterpillars. Frobenius implored Dedekind to keep this ingenious method a secret, promising to disclose it in a posthumous volume, *On the Methods of Mathematical Research*, with an appendix on caterpillar catching [**24**, p. 237]. Unfortunately, this volume never came out, which was a huge setback for the science of caterpillar-catching.

Miraculously, taking a break from research, combined with a healthy dose of working desk disorder, did help Frobenius refresh his thoughts and find a new approach. After returning home from vacation, Frobenius failed to find his earlier proof of one particular case of the missing theorem among his "highly scattered and disorganized papers". After "much torment", however, he discovered a new proof and recognized the crucial possibility of generalization [**24**, p. 237].

The same year Frobenius announced his results to the world in a series of papers. This was a wise move, since most of his correspondence with Dedekind eventually ended up in the hands of an American lawyer, who kept it in his drawer for thirty odd years and parted with it only after his retirement by giving it to a mathematics professor in exchange for \$25 [**27**].

Wielding the group determinant as his main weapon, within a few years Frobenius demolished a whole range of targets in representation theory. Although his proofs have now been supplanted by easier modern versions, his skills as a group determinant virtuoso remain unsurpassed, as the tool itself went out of use.

Frobenius labored mightily to keep things at the University of Berlin just the way they were in the glorious days of his student youth, and he accused the advocates of applied mathematics of trying to reduce this venerable institution to the rank of a technical school. His personality, which has been described as "occasionally choleric, quarrelsome, and given to invectives" [**21**], alienated him from many of his colleagues. Despite (or maybe partly due to?) Frobenius's uncompromising stance, the numbers of doctorates and teaching staff at the University gradually declined. Frobenius advised nineteen doctoral students, and only one of them wrote a dissertation on representation theory. Training that one student, however, proved fortuitous, for
