$$(\rho \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix} f)(x) = z^x f(x)$$

(note that $z^x$ makes sense since $z^p = 1$).

(a) Show that such a representation exists and is unique, and compute $\rho(g)$ for all $g \in G$.

(b) Denote this representation by $R_z$. Show that $R_z$ is irreducible if and only if $z \neq 1$.

(c) Classify all 1-dimensional representations of $G$. Show that $R_1$ decomposes into a direct sum of 1-dimensional representations, where each of them occurs exactly once.

(d) Use (a)—(c) and the "sum of squares" formula to classify all irreducible representations of $G$.

**Problem 4.12.3.** Let $V$ be a finite dimensional complex vector space, and let $GL(V)$ be the group of invertible linear transformations of $V$. Then $S^n V$ and $\Lambda^m V$ ($m \leq \dim(V)$) are representations of $GL(V)$ in a natural way. Show that they are irreducible representations.

Hint: Choose a basis $\{e_i\}$ in $V$. Find a diagonal element $H$ of $GL(V)$ such that $\rho(H)$ has distinct eigenvalues (where $\rho$ is one of the above representations). This shows that if $W$ is a subrepresentation, then it is spanned by a subset $S$ of a basis of eigenvectors of $\rho(H)$. Use the invariance of $W$ under the operators $\rho(1 + E_{ij})$ (where $E_{ij}$ is defined by $E_{ij} e_k = \delta_{jk} e_i$) for all $i \neq j$ to show that if the subset $S$ is nonempty, it is necessarily the entire basis.

**Problem 4.12.4.** Recall that the adjacency matrix of a graph $\Gamma$ (without multiple edges) is the matrix in which the $ij$th entry is 1 if the vertices $i$ and $j$ are connected with an edge, and zero otherwise. Let $\Gamma$ be a finite graph whose automorphism group is nonabelian. Show that the adjacency matrix of $\Gamma$ must have repeated eigenvalues.

**Problem 4.12.5.** Let $I$ be the set of vertices of a regular icosahedron ($|I| = 12$). Let $F(I)$ be the space of complex functions on $I$. Recall that the group $G = A_5$ of even permutations of five items acts on the icosahedron, so we have a 12-dimensional representation of $G$ on $F(I)$.
