(b) Using this classification, classify finite subgroups of $SU(2)$ (use the homomorphism $SU(2) \to SO(3)$).

**Problem 4.12.9.** Find the characters and tensor products of irreducible complex representations of the Heisenberg group from Problem 4.12.2.

**Problem 4.12.10.** Let $G$ be a finite group and let $V$ be a complex representation of $G$ which is faithful, i.e., the corresponding map $G \to GL(V)$ is injective. Show that any irreducible representation of $G$ occurs inside $S^nV$ (and hence inside $V^{\otimes n}$) for some $n$.

Hint: Show that there exists a vector $u \in V^*$ whose stabilizer in $G$ is 1. Now define the map $SV \to F(G, \mathbb{C})$ sending a polynomial $f$ on $V^*$ to the function $f_u$ on $G$ given by $f_u(g) = f(gu)$. Show that this map is surjective and use this to deduce the desired result.

**Problem 4.12.11.** This problem is about an application of representation theory to physics (elasticity theory). We first describe the physical motivation and then state the mathematical problem.

Imagine a material which occupies a certain region $U$ in the physical space $V = \mathbb{R}^3$ (a space with a positive definite inner product). Suppose the material is deformed. This means, we have applied a diffeomorphism (= change of coordinates) $g : U \to U'$. The question in elasticity theory is how much stress in the material this deformation will cause.

For every point $P \in U$, let $A_P : V \to V$ be defined by $A_P = dg(P)$. Here $A_P$ is nondegenerate, so it has a polar decomposition $A_P = D_P O_P$, where $O_P$ is orthogonal and $D_P$ is symmetric. The matrix $O_P$ characterizes the rotation part of $A_P$ (which clearly produces no stress), and $D_P$ is the distortion part, which actually causes stress. If the deformation is small, $D_P$ is close to 1, so $D_P = 1 + d_P$, where $d_P$ is a small symmetric matrix, i.e., an element of $S^2V$. This matrix is called the **deformation tensor** at $P$.

Now we define the stress tensor, which characterizes stress. Let $v$ be a small nonzero vector in $V$, and let $\sigma$ be a small disk perpendicular to $v$ centered at $P$ of area $||v||$. Let $F_v$ be the force with which the part of the material on the $v$-side of $\sigma$ acts on the part on the opposite
