side. It is easy to deduce from Newton's laws that $F_v$ is linear in $v$, so there exists a linear operator $S_P : V \to V$ such that $F_v = S_P v$. It is called **the stress tensor**.

An elasticity law is an equation $S_P = f(d_P)$, where $f$ is a function. The simplest such law is a linear law (Hooke's law): $f : S^2V \to \operatorname{End}(V)$ is a linear function. In general, such a function is defined by $9 \cdot 6 = 54$ parameters, but we will show there are actually only two essential ones — the **compression modulus** $K$ and the **shearing modulus** $\mu$. For this purpose we will use representation theory.

Recall that the group $SO(3)$ of rotations acts on $V$, so $S^2V$, $\operatorname{End}(V)$ are representations of this group. The laws of physics must be invariant under this group (Galileo transformations), so $f$ must be a homomorphism of representations.

(a) Show that $\operatorname{End}(V)$ admits a decomposition $\mathbb{R} \oplus V \oplus W$, where $\mathbb{R}$ is the trivial representation, $V$ is the standard 3-dimensional representation, and $W$ is a 5-dimensional representation of $SO(3)$. Show that $S^2V = \mathbb{R} \oplus W$.

(b) Show that $V$ and $W$ are irreducible, even after complexification. Deduce using Schur's lemma that $S_P$ is always symmetric, and for $x \in \mathbb{R}, y \in W$ one has $f(x + y) = Kx + \mu y$ for some real numbers $K, \mu$.

In fact, it is clear from physics that $K, \mu$ are positive. Physically, the compression modulus $K$ characterizes resistance of the material to compression or dilation, while the shearing modulus $\mu$ characterizes its resistance to changing the shape of the object without changing its volume. For instance, clay (used for sculpting) has a large compression modulus but a small shearing modulus.

## 4.13. Historical interlude: William Rowan Hamilton's quaternion of geometry, algebra, metaphysics, and poetry

At age 17, William Rowan Hamilton's interest in mathematics was sparked by his discovery of an error in Laplace's *Celestial Mechanics*. The Royal Astronomer of Ireland was so impressed that in a few years he secured for Hamilton the appointment as Royal Astronomer
