complex case. In the remaining two cases, let $B$ be the invariant bilinear form on $V$ and let $( \ , \ )$ be the invariant positive Hermitian form (they are defined up to a nonzero complex scalar and a positive real scalar, respectively). Define the operator $j : V \to V$ such that $B(v, w) = (v, jw)$. Show that $j$ is complex antilinear ($ji = -ij$), and $j^2 = \lambda \cdot \operatorname{Id}$, where $\lambda$ is a real number, positive in the real case and negative in the quaternionic case (if $B$ is renormalized, $j$ multiplies by a nonzero complex number $z$ and $j^2$ by $z\bar{z}$, as $j$ is antilinear). Thus $j$ can be normalized so that $j^2 = 1$ in the real case and $j^2 = -1$ in the quaternionic case. Deduce the claim from this.

(b) Show that $V$ is of real type if and only if $V$ is the complexification of a representation $V_{\mathbb{R}}$ over the field of real numbers.

**Example 5.1.3.** For $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ all irreducible representations are of complex type except the trivial one and, if $n$ is even, the "sign" representation, $m \to (-1)^m$, which are of real type. For $S_3$ all three irreducible representations $\mathbb{C}_+, \mathbb{C}_-, \mathbb{C}^2$ are of real type. For $S_4$ there are five irreducible representations $\mathbb{C}_+, \mathbb{C}_-, \mathbb{C}^2, \mathbb{C}^3_+, \mathbb{C}^3_-$, which are all of real type. Similarly, all five irreducible representations of $A_5$ — $\mathbb{C}$, $\mathbb{C}^3_+$, $\mathbb{C}^3_-$, $\mathbb{C}^4$, $\mathbb{C}^5$ — are of real type. As for $Q_8$, its 1-dimensional representations are of real type, and the 2-dimensional one is of quaternionic type.

**Definition 5.1.4.** The **Frobenius-Schur indicator** $FS(V)$ of an irreducible representation $V$ is $0$ if it is of complex type, $1$ if it is of real type, and $-1$ if it is of quaternionic type.

**Theorem 5.1.5** (Frobenius-Schur). *The number of involutions (= elements of order $\leq 2$) in $G$ is equal to $\sum_V \dim(V) FS(V)$, i.e., the sum of dimensions of all representations of $G$ of real type minus the sum of dimensions of its representations of quaternionic type.*

**Proof.** Let $A : V \to V$ have eigenvalues $\lambda_1, \lambda_2, \ldots, \lambda_n$. We have

$$\operatorname{Tr}|_{S^2V}(A \otimes A) = \sum_{i \leq j} \lambda_i \lambda_j,$$

$$\operatorname{Tr}|_{\Lambda^2V}(A \otimes A) = \sum_{i < j} \lambda_i \lambda_j.$$
