**Proof.** It suffices to prove this for two summands. If $\alpha_i$ are eigenvalues of rational matrices $A_i$ of smallest size (i.e., their characteristic polynomials are the minimal polynomials of $\alpha_i$), then $\alpha_1 + \alpha_2$ is an eigenvalue of $A := A_1 \otimes \mathrm{Id} + \mathrm{Id} \otimes A_2$. Therefore, so is any algebraic conjugate to $\alpha_1 + \alpha_2$. But all eigenvalues of $A$ are of the form $\alpha_1' + \alpha_2'$, so we are done. $\square$

**Problem 5.2.7.** (a) Show that for any finite group $G$ there exists a finite Galois extension $K \subset \mathbb{C}$ of $\mathbb{Q}$ such that any finite dimensional complex representation of $G$ has a basis in which the matrices of the group elements have entries in $K$.

Hint: Consider the representations of $G$ over the field $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}$ of algebraic numbers.

(b) Show that if $V$ is an irreducible complex representation of a finite group $G$ of dimension $> 1$, then there exists $g \in G$ such that $\chi_V(g) = 0$.

Hint: Assume the contrary. Use orthonormality of characters to show that the arithmetic mean of the numbers $|\chi_V(g)|^2$ for $g \neq 1$ is $< 1$. Deduce that their product $\beta$ satisfies $0 < \beta < 1$. Show that all conjugates of $\beta$ satisfy the same inequalities (consider the Galois conjugates of the representation $V$, i.e., representations obtained from $V$ by the action of the Galois group of $K$ over $\mathbb{Q}$ on the matrices of group elements in the basis from part (a)). Then derive a contradiction.

**Remark 5.2.8.** Here is a modification of this argument, which does not use (a). Let $N = |G|$. For any $0 < j < N$ coprime to $N$, show that the map $g \mapsto g^j$ is a bijection $G \to G$. Deduce that $\prod_{g \neq 1} |\chi_V(g^j)|^2 = \beta$. Then show that $\beta \in K := \mathbb{Q}(\zeta)$, $\zeta = e^{2\pi i/N}$, and that it does not change under the automorphism of $K$ given by $\zeta \mapsto \zeta^j$. Deduce that $\beta$ is an integer, and derive a contradiction.

## 5.3. Frobenius divisibility

**Theorem 5.3.1.** *Let $G$ be a finite group, and let $V$ be an irreducible representation of $G$ over $\mathbb{C}$. Then*

$$\dim V \text{ divides } |G|.$$
